

The Honourable

Elizabeth Aldworth



Aldworth in Masonic regalia, from a mezzotint of 1811



Born
Elizabeth St Leger

1693/1695

Doneraile, County Cork, Ireland


Died
1773/1775

County Cork, Ireland


Spouse(s)
Richard Aldworth


Children
St Leger Aldworth


Parent(s)



Arthur St Leger, 1st Viscount Doneraile (father)





Elizabeth Aldworth (1693/1695[note 1]–1773/1775[note 2]), born Elizabeth St Leger, was known in her time as "The Lady Freemason" and was the first recorded woman to be initiated into Regular Freemasonry.
She was the daughter of Arthur St Leger, 1st Viscount Doneraile, of Doneraile Court, County Cork, Ireland.[1]:7 She was married in 1713 to Richard Aldworth, Esq.[1]:7 Nothing else of her life is known between her initiation into Freemasonry as a young girl and her death almost sixty years later.



Contents


1 Initiation
2 Later life and death
3 Notes
4 References



Initiation[edit]
The date of her initiation into Freemasonry is uncertain, but the Memoir of a Lady Freemason indicates that it was between 1710–1712, before her marriage. In his paper in Ars Quatuor Coronatorum in 1895, Edward Conder states that it was sometime between 1710–1718.[2] In a reply to the paper, Masonic scholar William James Hughan stated: "Until Bro. Conder’s investigations we had all assumed that the various reports respecting the initiation of the Hon. Elizabeth St. Leger, though not always in agreement, were correct as to the occurrence being of a later date than 1730." Hughan also found the facts related to contradict the statements made by an Aldworth descendant.[2]
Those facts are found in the Memoir, extracted from the records of the First Lodge of Ireland, which state that Arundel Hill was present at the initiation and often sat in Lodge with her.[1]:8 The Memoir's editor also indicates that Conder's work was the first fixing of the date, which as of 1864 was not known.[1]:16
Conder also states that the particular Lodge in which she was initiated, while commonly thought at the time of his research to be known, is also unknown, but that it may have been a private Lodge warranted out of London by her father.[2] Conder also seems to be refuting an unelaborated-upon statement that Aldworth was initiated after the formation of the Grand Lodge of Ireland. He indicates that since the Viscount died in 1727, she could not have been initiated after that point, and at that time it seems that the commonly accepted date of formation of the Grand Lodge was 1729–30. It is now taken to be 1725.
The tradition of Aldworth's initiation is that Aldworth had fallen asleep while reading on a dim winter evening in the library, which was located next to the room in which the Lodge was meeting. In consequence of construction going on in the library, she was woken by the voices she heard next door, and the light shining through the loose brickwork. She removed some of the bricks and watched the proceedings. When she understood the solemnity of the proceedings, she wished to retreat, but was caught by the Lodge Tyler, who was also the family butler. Realizing her predicament, she screamed and fainted. The tyler summoned the Brethren (among them her father), and they ultimately decided to initiate her into the Lodge.[2]
Later life and death[edit]




1775 burial in Saint Finbarre's Cathedral




Part of a series on


Freemasonry







Overview


Grand Lodge
Masonic lodge
Masonic lodge officers
Grand Master
Prince Hall Freemasonry
Regular Masonic jurisdiction
Continental Freemasonry








History


History of Freemasonry
Liberté chérie
Masonic manuscripts








Masonic bodies


Masonic


Masonic bodies
York Rite
Order of Mark Master Masons
Holy Royal Arch
Royal Arch Masonry
Cryptic Masonry
Knights Templar
Red Cross of Constantine
Scottish Rite
Knight Kadosh
Societas Rosicruciana
Order of Royal and Select Masters
Grand College of Rites
Swedish Rite
Order of Saint Thomas of Acon
Royal Order of Scotland
Order of Knight Masons
Research Lodge
Corks


Side degrees


The Shrine
Royal Order of Jesters
Tall Cedars of Lebanon
The Grotto


Masonic groups for women


Women and Freemasonry
Order of the Amaranth
Order of the Eastern Star
Co-Freemasonry


Masonic youth organizations


DeMolay
A.J.E.F.
Job's Daughters
International Order of the Rainbow for Girls








Views of Masonry


Anti-Masonry
Anti-Masonic Party
Grand Anti-Masonic Exhibition
Masonic conspiracy theories
Opposition to Freemasonry within Christianity
Papal ban of Freemasonry
Suppression of Freemasonry
Taxil hoax








People and places


Masonic Temple
James Anderson
Prince Hall
William Preston
Thomas Smith Webb
Albert Mackey
Albert Pike
John the Evangelist
John the Baptist
William Schaw
Elizabeth Aldworth
List of Freemasons
Lodge Mother Kilwinning
Freemasons' Hall, London
Mark Masons' Hall, London
House of the Temple
Solomon's Temple
Detroit Masonic Temple
List of Masonic buildings








Related


Masonic ritual and symbolism
Great Architect of the Universe
Square and Compasses
Pigpen cipher
Eye of Providence
Hiram Abiff
Sprig of Acacia
Masonic Landmarks
Pike's Morals and Dogma
Propaganda Due
Dermott's Ahiman Rezon
Volume of Sacred Law








By country


Barbados
Belgium
Canada
Croatia
Denmark
France
Finland
Germany
Iceland
Indonesia
Italy
Lebanon
Luxembourg
Malta
Mexico
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Scotland
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sweden
Philippines
Turkey
Ukraine
Venezuela









v
t
e





In the reply to Conder's presentation, a Bro. Rylands indicated that "there was no evidence forthcoming" that Aldworth served as Master of a Lodge, or that she regularly attended.[2] Elizabeth Aldworth died in 1775. There was a plaque erected at the new St. Finbarre's Cathedral by the Masons of Cork, which reads:
In Pious Memory of

The Honourable

ELIZABETH ALDWORTH,

Wife of

RICHARD ALDWORTH,

Of Newmarket Court, Co. Cork, Esq.,

Daughter of

ARTHUR, FIRST VISCOUNT DONERAILE.

Her Remains Lie Close to This Spot.

Born 1695, Died 1775.

Initiated into Masonry in

Lodge No. 44, at Doneraile Court

In this County, A.D. 1712.[1]:22 [note 3]
The International Mixed Order of Freemasonry Le Droit Humain has dedicated its first lodge to her: Lodge Elizabeth Saint Leger (Triangle)
Notes[edit]



^ AQC and Memoir both indicate a birthdate of 1693, while the cathedral plaque indicates 1695.
^ AQC indicates 1773, Memoir and the cathedral plaque both indicate 1775.
^ The editor of Memoir states in a footnote that Doneraile Lodge, No. 44 was founded at Clonnel in 1844, and that the number given is therefore incorrect.



References[edit]



^ a b c d e Day, John, ed. The Memoir of the Lady Freemason. Cork: Guy & Co., 1914.
^ a b c d e Conder, Edward. "The Hon. Miss St. Leger and Freemasonry". The Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon. Reprinted with permission from Ars Quatuor Coronatorum: the Transactions of Quatuor Coronati Lodge No. 2076, UGLE, vol. viii (1895), pp. 16–23. Accessed 13 August 2011.







