This article is about the Lakota sub-tribe. For the musical group, see Brulé (band). For Métis people, see Bois-Brûlés. For other uses, see Brule.

Sicangu

Brulé


Janeen Antoine (Sicangu Lakota), curator and educator[1]



Regions with significant populations


 United States

( South Dakota)


Languages


Lakota, English


Religion


traditional tribal religion, Sun Dance,

Native American Church, Christianity


Related ethnic groups


other Lakota people)


The Brulé are one of the seven branches or bands (sometimes called "sub-tribes") of the Teton (Titonwan) Lakota American Indian people. They are known as Sičháŋǧu Oyáte (in Lakota), or "Burnt Thighs Nation", and so, were called Brulé (literally "burnt") by the French. The name may have derived from an incident where they were fleeing through a grass fire on the plains.



Contents


1 Distribution
2 Name
3 Historic Brulé Tiyošpaye or bands
4 Ethnobotany
5 Notable Sicangu (Brulé)
6 See also
7 References
8 External links



Distribution[edit]
Many Sicangu people live on the Rosebud Indian Reservation in southwestern South Dakota and are enrolled in the federally recognized Rosebud Sioux Tribe, known as Sicangu Oyate. A smaller population lives on the Lower Brule Indian Reservation, on the west bank of the Missouri River in central South Dakota. Others live on Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. The different federally recognized tribes are politically independent of each other.
Name[edit]




Sičhą́ǧu


The term "Sičhą́ǧu" appears on pages 3 to 14 of Beginning Lakhota.[2]

"Ká Lakȟóta kį líla hą́ske. 'That Indian (over yonder) is very tall.'"

"Hą, hé Sičhą́ǧú. 'Yes, that's a Rosebud Sioux.'"

It appears to be a compound word of the Thítȟųwą Lakȟóta dialect meaning "burned thigh".[3]
Historic Brulé Tiyošpaye or bands[edit]
Together with the Oglala Lakota, who are mostly based at the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, they are often called Southern Lakota. They were divided in three great regional tribal divisions:

Lower Brulé (Kul Wicasa Oyate, ″Lowland People″, lived along the White River to its mouth into the Missouri River (Mnišoše) as well in the Missouri River Valley in South Dakota, some ventured south to the Niobrara River)[4]
Upper Brulé (Heyata Wicasa Oyate - ″Highland People″, ventured further south and west onto the Plains along the Platte River between the North and South Platte River in Nebraska in the search for buffalo, the allied Southern Cheyenne and Southern Arapaho welcomed them as strong allies to this lands which they had further claimed, along the Loup River - the former center of the Skidi or Wolf/Loup Pawnee - they went down south to plunder enemy Pawnee and Arikara camps, therefore also known as: Kheyatawhichasha - ″People away from the (Missouri) River″)
(Upper) Brulé of the Platte River (actually a splinter group of the Upper Brulé and the southernmost Brulé group, generally along the South Platte River in Colorado with hunting bands south to the Republican River - home to the enemy Kithehaki / Kitkehaxki of the South Bands Pawnee, also known as: Kheyatawhichasha - ″People away from the (Missouri) River″)

According to the Brulé Medicine Bull (Tatánka Wakan), the people were decentralized and identified with the following tiyošpaye or extended family groups who collected in various local tiwahe (English: Camps or family circles):

Iyakoza
Chokatowela
Shiyolanka
Kanghi yuha
Pispiza wichasha
Waleghaunwohan
Wacheunpa
Shawala
Ihanktonwan
Nakhpakhpa
Apewantanka




Ethnobotany[edit]
The Brulé give pulverized roots Asclepias viridiflora to children with diarrhea, and nursing mothers take an infusion of the whole plant to increase their milk.[5] They brew the leaves of Ceanothus herbaceus into a tea.[6]
Notable Sicangu (Brulé)[edit]




Chief Iron Nation



Mary Brave Bird, author
Leonard Crow Dog, spiritual leader, American Indian Movement activist
Paul Eagle Star (1866-24 August 1891), performer with Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show
Hollow Horn Bear, chief
Iron Nation, chief
Iron Shell, chief
Little Thunder, chief
Arnold Short Bull, a well-known Sicangu holy man, who brought the Ghost Dance to the Lakota in South Dakota in 1890
Michael Spears, actor
Eddie Spears, actor
Spotted Tail or "Sinte Gleska", 19th-century chief[7]
Moses Stranger Horse, artist
Two Strike, chief
Albert White Hat, Lakota language teacher
Dyani White Hawk, contemporary painter and former curator of All My Relations Arts gallery
Chauncey Yellow Robe, educator, lecturer and activist
Rosebud Yellow Robe, folklorist, educator and author
Rosalie Little Thunder spiritual activist, language teacher, bead worker
Frank Waln, is a Sicangu Lakota rapper

Sonny Skyhawk, Sicangu Lakota Actor/Producer/Activist, member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences.
See also[edit]

Bois-Brûlés

References[edit]



^ "Native American Heritage Month: S.F. gallery director wins praise for breaking with past."[permanent dead link] San Francisco Chronicle. 12 Nov 1995 (retrieved 20 Dec 2009)
^ Beginning Lakhota, Volume 1, (Boulder: University of Colorado Lakhota Project, 1976).
^ Famous Indians of Northwest Nebraska. Chadron Centennial Committee. 1983. p. 34. 
^ Lower Brule
^ Rogers, Dilwyn J, 1980, Lakota Names and Traditional Uses of Native Plants by Sicangu (Brule) People in the Rosebud Area, South Dakota, St. Francis, SD. Rosebud Educational Scoiety, page 34
^ Rogers, Dilwyn J, 1980, Lakota Names and Traditional Uses of Native Plants by Sicangu (Brule) People in the Rosebud Area, South Dakota, St. Francis, SD. Rosebud Educational Scoiety, page 56
^ Brown, Dee (1970). Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee, ch. 6. Bantam Books. ISBN 0-553-11979-6. 



External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Brulé Sioux.



Official website of the Sicangu Oyate, Rosebud Sioux Tribe
Indian genealogy
Official website of the Kul Wicasa Oyate (Lower Brule)





