






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable. Please help this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged or deleted. (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article may be too technical for most readers to understand. Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts, without removing the technical details. (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline. Please help to establish notability by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond its mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be established, the article is likely to be merged, redirected, or deleted.

Find sources: "Multicast-broadcast single-frequency network" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (September 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Multicast-broadcast single-frequency network (MBSFN) is a communication channel defined in the fourth-generation cellular networking standard called Long Term Evolution (LTE). The transmission mode is intended as a further improvement of the efficiency of the enhanced Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Service (eMBMS) service, which can deliver services such as mobile TV using the LTE infrastructure, and is expected to compete with dedicated mobile/handheld TV broadcast systems such as DVB-H and DVB-SH.[1][2] This enables network operators to offer mobile TV without the need for additional expensive licensed spectrum and without requiring new infrastructure and end-user devices.[3]
The eMBMS service can offer many more TV programs in a specific radio frequency spectrum as compared to traditional terrestrial TV broadcasting, since it is based on the principles of Interactive Multicast, where TV content only is transmitted in where there currently are viewers. The eMBMS service also provides better system spectral efficiency than video-on-demand over traditional cellular unicasting services, since in eMBMS, each TV program is only transmitted once in each cell, even if there are several viewers of that program in the same cell. The MBSFN transmission mode further improves the spectral efficiency, since it is based on the principles of Dynamic single frequency networks (DSFN). This implies that it dynamically forms single-frequency networks (SFNs), i.e. groups of adjacent base stations that send the same signal simultaneously on the same frequency sub-carriers, when there are mobile TV viewers of the same TV program content in the adjacent cells. The LTE OFDMA downlink modulation and multiple access scheme eliminates self-interference caused by the SFN:s. Efficient TV transmission using similar combinations of Interactive multicast (IP Multicast) and DSFN has also been suggested for the DVB-T2 and DVB-H systems.[4]
MBMS and mobile TV was a failure in 3G systems, and was offered by very few mobile operators, partly because of its limited peak bit rates and capacity, not allowing standard TV video quality, something that LTE with eMBMS does not suffer from.



Contents


1 Technical details
2 Commercial adoption
3 References
4 External links



Technical details[edit]
LTE's Enhanced Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Services (E-MBMS) provides transport features for sending the same content information to all the users in a cell (broadcast) or to a given set of users (subscribers) in a cell (multicast) using a subset of the available radio resources with the remaining available to support transmissions towards a particular user (so-called unicast services). It must not be confused with IP-level broadcast or multicast, which offer no sharing of resources on the radio access level. In E-MBMS it is possible to either use a single eNode-B or multiple eNode-Bs for transmission to multiple UEs. MBSFN is the definition for the latter.[5]
MBSFN is a transmission mode which exploits LTE's OFDM radio interface to send multicast or broadcast data as a multicell transmission over a synchronized single-frequency network (SFN). The transmissions from the multiple cells are sufficiently tightly synchronized for each to arrive at the UE within the OFDM Cyclic Prefix (CP) so as to avoid Inter-Symbol Interference (ISI). In effect, this makes the MBSFN transmission appear to a UE as a transmission from a single large cell, dramatically increasing the Signal-to-Interference Ratio (SIR) due to the absence of inter-cell interference.[6]
Commercial adoption[edit]
Commercial deployment of E-MBMS (and therefore MBSFN) features is expected to start in 2013 as an upgrade of existing LTE networks.[7] Lowell McAdam, CEO of Verizon, stated in his CES 2013 keynote that he hopes to have LTE-Broadcast available to live-broadcast the Super Bowl 2014 over its network. On a more general note, he identified live events as the ideal use case for LTE-Broadcast.[8]
References[edit]



^ "Long Term Evolution (LTE): A Technical Overview" (PDF). Motorola Technical White Paper. p. 10. 
^ Turner, Lorraine. "3G evolution to rival DVB-H, WiMAX - Analysys". Total Telecom. Retrieved 9 February 2006. 
^ Fitchard, Kevin. "Why Qualcomm thinks LTE-broadcast will work where FLO TV failed". Retrieved 9 April 2013. 
^ M. Eriksson, S.M. Hasibur Rahman, F. Fraille, M. Sjöström, ”Efficient Interactive Multicast over DVB-T2 - Utilizing Dynamic SFNs and PARPS”, 2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (BMSB’13), London, UK, June 2013.
^ Lescuyer, Pierre (2008). Evolved Packet System (EPS): The LTE and SAE Evolution of 3G UMTS. Wiley. pp. 140–143. ISBN 978-0-470-05976-0. 
^ Sesia, Stefania (2009). LTE - A Pocket Dictionary of Acronyms (PDF). Wiley. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-470-69716-0. 
^ Parker, Tammy. "Making the case for LTE Broadcast and Dyle mobile TV". Retrieved 15 August 2012. 
^ Fitchard, Kevin. "Can LTE-broadcast dam the mobile video deluge?". Retrieved 10 January 2013. 



External links[edit]

3GPP specifications TS 36.201 and TS 36.300
BP Tiwari: Is LTE capable of enabling new TV experience? (BEYOND 4G: Telecom Research and News Analysis, June 4, 2010)
Santhanaraj Muthusamy: Solution Area: e-MBMS in LTE (Teleca White Papers, February 2011)
eMBMS BM-SC Gateway





