






This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)







This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)









This article is written like a personal reflection or opinion essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (November 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





(Learn how and when to remove this template message)



A television channel is a broadcast frequency or virtual number over which a television station or television network is distributed. For example, in North America, "channel 2" refers to the broadcast or cable band of 54 to 60 MHz, with carrier frequencies of 55.25 MHz for NTSC analog video (VSB) and 59.75 MHz for analog audio (FM), or 55.31 MHz for digital ATSC (8VSB). Channels may be shared by many different television stations or cable-distributed channels depending on the location and service provider
Depending on the multinational bandplan for a given regional n, analog television channels are typically 6, 7, or 8 MHz in bandwidth, and therefore television channel frequencies vary as well. Channel numbering is also different. Digital television channels are the same as their analog predecessors for legacy reasons, however through multiplexing, each physical radio frequency (RF) channel can carry several digital subchannels. On satellites, each transponder normally carries one channel, however multiple small, independent channels can be on one transponder, with some loss of bandwidth due to the need for guard bands between unrelated transmissions. ISDB, used in Japan and Brazil, has a similar segmented mode.
Preventing interference between over-the-air channels in the same area is accomplished by skipping at least one channel between two analog stations' frequency allocations. (Where channel numbers are sequential, frequencies are not contiguous, such as channel 6 to 7 skip from VHF low to high band, and channel 13 to 14 jump to UHF.) On cable TV, it is possible to use adjacent channels only because they are all at the same power, something which could only be done over the air if the two stations were transmitted at the same power and height from the same location. For digital TV, selectivity is inherently better, therefore channels adjacent (either to analog or digital stations) can be used even in the same area.



Contents


1 Other meanings

1.1 Television station
1.2 Non-broadcast television channels


2 See also
3 References
4 External links



Other meanings[edit]
Commonly, the term "television channel" is used to refer either to a terrestrial television station or its cable/satellite counterpart (both outlined below). Sometimes, especially outside the U.S. and in the context of cable/satellite television, it is used instead of the term television network, which otherwise (in its technical use above) describes a group of geographically-distributed television stations that share affiliation/ownership and some or all of their programming with one another.
This terminology may be muddled somewhat in other jurisdictions, for instance Europe, where terrestrial channels are commonly mapped from physical channels to common numerical positions (i.e. BBC One does not broadcast on any particular "channel 1" but is nonetheless mapped to the "1" input on most British television sets). On digital platforms, such (location) channels are usually arbitrary and changeable, due to virtual channels.
Television station[edit]
Main article: Television station
A television station is a type of broadcast station that broadcasts both audio and video to television receivers in a particular area. Traditionally, TV stations made their broadcasts by sending specially-encoded radio signals over the air, called terrestrial television. Individual television stations are usually granted licenses by a government agency to use a particular section of the radio spectrum (a channel) through which they send their signals. Some stations use LPTV broadcast translators to retransmit to further areas.
Main article: Digital television transition
Many television stations are now in the process of converting from analogue (NTSC, PAL or SECAM) broadcast, to digital TV (ATSC broadcast, DVB or ISDB).
Non-broadcast television channels[edit]
Because some regions have had difficulty picking up over-the-air signals (particularly in mountainous areas), alternative means of distribution such as direct-to-home satellite and cable television have been introduced. Television channels specifically built to run on cable or satellite blur the line between TV station and TV network. That fact led some early cable channels to call themselves superstations.
Satellite and cable have created changes. Local programming TV stations in an area can sign-up or even be required to be carried on cable, but content providers like TLC cannot. They are not licensed to run broadcast equipment like a station, and they do not regularly provide content to licensed broadcasters either. Furthermore, a distributor like TNT may start producing its own programming, and shows presented exclusively on cable/satellite by one distributor may be syndicated to broadcast stations. The cost of creating a nationwide channel has been reduced and there has been a huge increase in the number of such channels, with most catering to a small group. See also: significantly viewed.
From the definitions above, use of the terms "network" or "station" in reference to nationwide cable/satellite channels is technically inaccurate. However, this is an arbitrary, inconsequential distinction, and varies from company to company. Indeed, the term "cable network" has entered into common usage in the United States in reference to such channels. There is even some geographical separation among "national" cable/satellite channels in the U.S., be it programming (e.g., the Fox Sports group of regional sports channels, which share several programs), or simply regionalized advertising inserted by the local cable company.
Should a legal distinction be necessary between a (location) channel as defined above and a television channel in this sense, the terms "programming service" (e.g.[1]) or "programming undertaking" (for instance,[2]) may be used instead of the latter definition.
A person viewing by cable or satellite might not know what kind of organization is responsible for a given program, especially if it is syndicated, so what seems to be a station or a network may be neither.
See also[edit]



Look up television channel in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Barker channel
Lists of television channels
Television channel frequencies

References[edit]



^ Center, Arbitration and Mediation. "WIPO Domain Name Decision: D2001-1440". arbiter.wipo.int. 
^ http://www.crtc.gc.ca/Eng/forms/efiles/f109.htm



External links[edit]

What ever happened to Channel 1?







v
t
e


Telecommunications



History




Beacon
Broadcasting
Cable protection system
Cable TV
Communications satellite
Computer network
Drums
Electrical telegraph
Fax
Heliographs
Hydraulic telegraph
Internet
Mass media
Mobile phone
Optical telecommunication
Optical telegraphy
Pager
Photophone
Prepay mobile phone
Radio
Radiotelephone
Satellite communications
Semaphore
Smartphone
Smoke signals
Telecommunications history
Telautograph
Telegraphy
Teleprinter (teletype)
Telephone
The Telephone Cases
Television
Timeline of communication technology
Undersea telegraph line
Videoconferencing
Videophone
Videotelephony
Whistled language





Pioneers



Edwin Howard Armstrong
John Logie Baird
Paul Baran
Alexander Graham Bell
Tim Berners-Lee
Jagadish Chandra Bose
Vint Cerf
Claude Chappe
Donald Davies
Lee de Forest
Philo Farnsworth
Reginald Fessenden
Elisha Gray
Erna Schneider Hoover
Charles K. Kao
Hedy Lamarr
Innocenzo Manzetti
Guglielmo Marconi
Antonio Meucci
Radia Perlman
Alexander Stepanovich Popov
Johann Philipp Reis
Nikola Tesla
Camille Tissot
Alfred Vail
Charles Wheatstone
Vladimir K. Zworykin





Transmission

media



Coaxial cable
Fiber-optic communication

Optical fiber


Free-space optical communication
Molecular communication
Radio waves
Transmission line





Network topology

and switching



Links
Nodes
Terminal node
Network switching (circuit
packet)
Telephone exchange





Multiplexing



Space-division
Frequency-division
Time-division
Polarization-division
Orbital angular-momentum
Code-division





Networks



ARPANET
BITNET
Cellular network
Computer
CYCLADES
Ethernet
FidoNet
Internet
ISDN
LAN
Mobile
NGN
NPL network
Public Switched Telephone
Radio
Telecommunications equipment
Television
Telex
WAN
Wireless
World Wide Web








 Category
 Portal










