



Girih pattern with inlaid floral decoration from Shah-i-Zinda in Samarkand, Uzbekistan


Girih (Persian: گره‎, "knot") is a decorative Islamic geometric artform used in architecture and handicraft objects, consisting of angled lines that form an interlaced strapwork pattern.
Girih decoration is believed to have been inspired by Syrian Roman knotwork patterns from the 2nd century AD. The earliest girih dates from around 1000 AD, and the artform flourished until the 15th century. Girih patterns can be created in a variety of ways, including the traditional compass and straightedge; the construction of a grid of polygons; and the use of a set of girih tiles with lines drawn on them: the lines form the pattern. Patterns may be elaborated by the use of two levels of design, as at the 1453 Darb-e Imam shrine. Square repeating units of known patterns can be copied as templates, and historic pattern books may have been intended for use in this way.
The 15th century Topkapı Scroll explicitly shows girih patterns together with the tilings used to create them. A set of tiles consisting of a dart and a kite shape can be used to create aperiodic Penrose tilings, though there is no evidence that such a set was used in medieval times. Girih patterns have been used to decorate varied materials including stone screens, as at Fatehpur Sikri; plasterwork, as at mosques and madrasas such as Hunat Hatun, Kayseri; metal, as at Sultan Hassan mosque, Cairo; and in wood, as at the Great Mosque of Cordoba.



Contents


1 History

1.1 Origins
1.2 Early Islamic forms


2 Construction

2.1 Compass and straight edge
2.2 Polygons in contact
2.3 Girih tiles
2.4 Two-level design

2.4.1 Aperiodicity
2.4.2 The Topkapı Scroll


2.5 Templates


3 Girih in varied materials
4 See also
5 Notes
6 References



History[edit]
Further information: Islamic geometric patterns
Origins[edit]




2nd century Roman mosaic in Bosra with curvilinear knot patterns


The girih style of ornamentation is thought to have been inspired by 2nd century AD Syrian Roman knotwork patterns.[1] These had curvilinear interlaced strapwork with three-fold rotational symmetry. The Umayyad Mosque (709–715) in Damascus, Syria has window screens made of interlacing undulating strapwork in the form of six-pointed stars.[2] Early examples of Islamic geometric patterns made of straight strap lines can be seen in the architecture of the surviving gateway of the Ribat-i Malik caravanserai, Uzbekistan, built in 1078.[3]
Early Islamic forms[edit]
The earliest form of girih on a book is seen in the frontispiece of a Koran manuscript from the year 1000, found in Baghdad.[4] It is illuminated with interlacing octagons and thuluth calligraphy.[5]
In woodwork, one of the earliest surviving examples of Islamic geometric art is the 13th-century minbar (pulpit) of the Ibn Tulun Mosque in Cairo.[6][7] Girih patterns can be created in woodwork in two different ways. In one, a wooden grille with polygons and stars is created; the holes can be left as they are, or filled with some material. In the other, called gereh-chini[8] small wooden panels of geometric shapes are created individually, and combined to create an elaborate design.[1]
The term "girih" was used in Turkish for polygonal strap patterns in architecture as early as the late 15th century.[9] In the same period, artisans compiled girih pattern books such as the Topkapı Scroll.[10]
While curvilinear precedents of girih were seen in the 10th century, fully developed girih patterns were not seen before the 11th century in Iran. It became a dominant design element in the 11th and 12th centuries, as in the carved stucco panels with interlaced girih of the Kharraqan towers (1067) near Qazvin, Iran.[1][11] Stylized plant decorations were sometimes co-ordinated with girih.[12]
After the Safavid period, the use of girih continued in the Seljuk and Ilkhanid periods. In the 14th century, girih became a minor element in the decorative arts; it was largely replaced by vegetal patterns during the Timurid era, but continued to be important in decorative arts in Central Asian monuments after that time.[1]

Construction[edit]




A girih pattern based on a hexagonal overlapping circles grid that can be drawn with compass and straight edge



A window cage at the Topkapı Palace, built with this girih pattern




Compass and straight edge[edit]
Further information: Compass and straightedge constructions
Girih consists of geometric designs, often of stars and polygons, which can be constructed in a variety of ways.[13] Girih star and polygon patterns with 5- and 10-fold rotational symmetry are known to have been made as early as the 13th century. Such figures can be drawn by compass and straightedge. The first girih patterns were made by copying a pattern template on a regular grid; the pattern was drawn with compass and straightedge. Today, artisans using traditional techniques use a pair of dividers to leave an incision mark on a paper sheet that has been left in the sun to make it brittle. Straight lines are drawn with a pencil and an unmarked straightedge.[a][8] Girih patterns made this way are based on tessellations, tiling the plane with a unit cell and leaving no gaps. Because the tiling makes use of translation and rotation operations, the unit cells need to have 2-, 3-, 4- or 6-fold rotational symmetry.[15][16]

Polygons in contact[edit]
One of the early Western students of Islamic patterns, Ernest Hanbury Hankin, defined a "geometrical arabesque" as a pattern formed "with the help of construction lines consisting of polygons in contact."[17] He observed that many different combinations of polygons can be used as long as the residual spaces between the polygons are reasonably symmetrical. For example, a grid of octagons in contact has squares (of the same side as the octagons) as the residual spaces. Every octagon is the basis for an 8-point star, as seen at Akbar's tomb, Sikandra (1605–1613). Hankin considered the "skill of the Arabian artists in discovering suitable combinations of polygons .. almost astounding."[17]
Girih tiles[edit]




Girih tiles



A pattern made from these tiles



Detail of Yeşil Mosque (Bursa, Turkey) using this girih pattern




Main article: Girih tiles
By the 15th century, some girih patterns were no longer periodic, and may have been constructed using girih tiles. This method is based on a set of five tiles with lines drawn on them; when used to tile the plane with no gaps, the lines on the tiles form a girih pattern. It is not yet known when girih tiles were first used for architectural decoration instead of compass and straightedge, but it was probably at the start of the 13th century.[18][19] Methods of ornamentation were extremely diverse, however, and the idea that one method was used for all of them has been criticised as anachronistic.[20]

Two-level design[edit]




Girih pattern on a spandrel from the Darb-i Imam shrine, Isfahan, Iran



Reconstruction of the larger-scale thick line pattern with larger tiles, and a spandrel in yellow



Subdivision rule for the spandrel's pattern




The girih patterns on the Darb-e Imam shrine built in 1453 at Isfahan had a much more complex pattern than any previously seen. The details of the pattern indicate that girih tiles, rather than compass and straightedge, were used for decorating the shrine. The patterns appear aperiodic; within the area on the wall where they are displayed, they do not form a regularly repeating pattern; and they are drawn at two different scales. A large-scale pattern is discernible when the building is viewed from a distance, and a smaller-scale pattern forming part of the larger one can be seen from closer up.[18]
Although there is evidence that some ancient girih tilings used a subdivision rule to draw a two-level pattern, there are no known historic examples that can be repeated an infinite level of times. For example, the pattern used in the spandrel of the Darb-i Imam shrine (see figure) consists only of decagons and bowties, while the subdivision rule uses an elongated hexagon tile alongside these two shapes. Therefore, this design lacks self-similarity between the two levels.[18]

Aperiodicity[edit]
A periodic tiling of the plane is the regular repetition of a "unit cell", in the manner of a wallpaper, without any gaps. Such tilings can be seen as a two-dimensional crystal, and because of the crystallographic restriction theorem, the unit cell is restricted to a rotational symmetry of 2-fold, 3-fold, 4-fold, and 6-fold. It is therefore impossible to tile the plane periodically with a figure that has five-fold rotational symmetry, such as a five-pointed star or a decagon. Patterns with infinite perfect quasi-periodic translational order can have crystallographically forbidden rotational symmetries such as pentagonal or decagonal shapes. These quasi-crystalline tilings contain shapes with five-fold symmetry that repeat periodically, in between other shapes that do not repeat.[18]
One way to create quasi-periodic patterns is to create a Penrose tiling. Girih tiles can be subdivided into Penrose tiles called "dart" and "kite", but there is no evidence that this approach was used by medieval artisans.[18] Another way to create quasiperiodic patterns is by subdividing girih tiles repeatedly into smaller tiles using a subdivision rule. In the limit the plane would be divided into girih tiles that repeat with frequencies that are aperiodic. The use of such a subdivision rule would serve as evidence that Islamic artisans of the 15th century were aware that girih tiles can produce complex patterns that never exactly repeat themselves. However, no known patterns made with girih tiles have more than a two-level design. There would have been no practical need for a girih pattern with more than two levels of design, as a third level would be either too large or too small to be perceived. It appears that medieval Islamic artisans were using a tool that had the potential of creating highly complex patterns, but they never realized it. As E. Makovicky argues,[21]

The artisans were satisfied by creating a large fundamental domain without being concerned with the mathematical notion of indefinitely expandable quasiperiodic patterns. However, they understood and used to their advantage some of the local geometric properties of the quasi-crystalline patterns they constructed.[21]

The Topkapı Scroll[edit]




A Topkapı Scroll panel; featuring a girih pattern in black with red tiles



Topkapı scroll panel with patterns at two scales and tiles used



Reconstruction of the small scale pattern (thick black lines) in left panel, using small tiles



Reconstruction of the large scale pattern (thick red lines) in left panel, using large tiles




The Topkapı Scroll, from the late 15th century, documents the use of girih tiles to create girih patterns. The drawings in this pattern book show the girih lines superimposed on the tiles used to generate the pattern, making the construction fully evident.[18]
Templates[edit]
Once a repeating pattern has been constructed, regardless of the method used, the pattern can be recreated by copying a repeating unit of it, like the pattern of a wallpaper, as a paper template. The pattern can then simply be pricked through on to the surface to be decorated. The Topkapı Scroll grids may well have been meant for use as such templates.[20] The Anonymous Compendium contains square repeat units for many girih patterns.[20] Ibn al-Razzaz al-Jazari's Compendium of Science and Useful Practice in the Mechanical Arts contains explicit templates for special purposes such as cast bronze doors.[20]
Girih in varied materials[edit]







Girih stone screens at the tomb of Salim Chishti, Fatehpur Sikri, 16th century









Girih in plasterwork of Iwan of Hunat Hatun medersa, Kayseri









Girih in metal: 12-pointed star on gate at Sultan Hassan's mosque, Cairo









Girih in wood: grille in the Great Mosque of Cordoba




See also[edit]

Muqarnas

Notes[edit]



^ Eric Broug's Islamic Geometric Patterns illustrates many such patterns, and (in the Appendix) gives detailed instructions for their construction using only compass and straightedge.[14]



References[edit]


^ a b c d "Gereh Sazi". Encyclopaedia Iranica Online. Retrieved 2013-01-01. 
^ Broug, Eric (2008). Islamic Geometric Patterns. Thames and Hudson. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-500-28721-7. 
^ Broug, Eric (2008). Islamic Geometric Patterns. Thames and Hudson. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-500-28721-7. 
^ "Materials and Mediums". Pattern in Islamic Art. Retrieved 2012-02-08. 
^ Tabbaa, Yasser (2002). The transformation of Islamic art during the Sunni revival. I. B. Tauris. p. 84. ISBN 978-1-85043-392-7. 
^ "Jami' Ibn Tulun". Retrieved 25 January 2017. 
^ Broug, Eric (2008). Islamic Geometric Patterns. Thames and Hudson. pp. 66–69. ISBN 978-0-500-28721-7. 
^ a b Henry, Richard (2007). "Pattern, Cognition and contemplation: Exploring the Geometric Art of Iran" (PDF). Iran Society. Retrieved 2012-02-08. 
^ Dündar, A. (2003). "Bir Belgeye Göre Amasya II. Bayezid Külliyesi" (PDF). Ankara Üniverstesi İlahiyat Fakültesi Dergisi (in Turkish). 44 (2): 131–172. 
^ Katz, V. J. (2007). The Mathematics of Egypt, Mesopotamia, China, India, and Islam. Princeton University Press. p. 620. ISBN 978-0-691-11485-9. 
^ "Architecture – iv. Central Asian". Encyclopaedia Iranica. August 11, 2011. Retrieved 2012-02-08. 
^ Pugachenkova, G. A.; Dani, A. H. Dani; Yinsheng, Liu (2000). "Urban development and architecture". History of Civilizations of Central Asia Volume IV: The Age of Achievement: A.D. 750 to the End of the Fifteenth Century – Part Two: The Achievements. UNESCO. ISBN 978-92-3-103654-5. CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)
^ Allen, Terry (2004). "Islamic Art and the Argument from Academic Geometry". Retrieved 2012-01-23. 
^ Broug, Eric (2008). Islamic Geometric Patterns. Thames and Hudson. pp. 194–243. ISBN 978-0-500-28721-7. 
^ Cromwell, P.R. (2009). "The Search for Quasi-Periodicity in Islamic 5-fold Ornament". Mathematical Intelligencer. 31 (1): 36–56. doi:10.1007/s00283-008-9018-6. 
^ Lee, A. J. (1987). "Islamic Star Patterns". Muqarnas. 4: 182–197. doi:10.2307/1523103. JSTOR 1523103. 
^ a b Hankin, Ernest Hanbury (1925). The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art. Memoirs of the Archaeological Survey of India No. 15. Government of India Central Publication Branch. 
^ a b c d e f Peter J. Lu and Paul J. Steinhardt (2007). "Decagonal and Quasi-crystalline Tilings in Medieval Islamic Architecture" (PDF). Science. 315 (5815): 1106–1110. Bibcode:2007Sci...315.1106L. doi:10.1126/science.1135491. PMID 17322056. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-10-07. 
^ Lu and Steinhardt, Supplementary figures Archived 2009-03-26 at the Wayback Machine.
^ a b c d Necipoglu, Gulru (2017). The Arts of Ornamental Geometry: A Persian Compendium on Similar and Complementary Interlocking Figures. A Volume Commemorating Alpay Özdural. Brill. pp. 11–76. ISBN 978-90-04-31520-4. 
^ a b Emil Makovicky. "Comment on "Decagonal and Quasi-Crystalline Tilings in Medieval Islamic Architecture"". Retrieved 2012-02-22. 








v
t
e


Islamic architecture



categories



Arabic architecture
Berber architecture
Iranian architecture
Islamic architecture
Mughal architecture
Ottoman architecture





styles



Abbasid
Anatolia Beyliks
Ayyubid
Azeri
Bengali
Chinese
Fatimid
Indo-Islamic
Indonesian / Malaysian
Isfahani
Khorasani
Mamluk
Modern
Moorish
Moroccan
Mudéjar
Mughal
Ottoman
Pakistani
Razi
Seljuk
Somali
Sudano-Sahelian
Tatar
Timurid
Umayyad
Vernacular Persian
Yemenite





elements




structural



Ablaq
Chahartaq
Chhajja
Hasht-Bihisht
Hypostyle
Iwan
Jharokha
Kucheh
Liwan
Mashrabiya
Moroccan riad
Qadad
Riwaq
Sahn
Semi-dome
Shabestan
Squinch
Tadelakt
Vaulting
Voussoir
Windcatcher






Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem



arch

styles



Discharging arch
Four-centred arch
Horseshoe arch
Multifoil arch
Ogee arch
Pointed arch





roof

styles



Dome (Arabic dome / Onion dome / Persian dome / South Asian dome)
Guldasta
Tajug





religious

objects



Bedug
Dikka
Gonbad
Hussainiya
Imamzadeh
Kiswah
Loudspeakers
Maqsurah
Mihrab
Minaret
Minbar
Müezzin mahfili
Qibla
Zarih





decorations



Alfiz
Arabesque
Banna'i
Girih
Girih tiles
Islamic calligraphy
Islamic geometric patterns
Islamic interlace patterns
Jali
Mocárabe
Mosque lamp
Muqarnas
Nagash painting
Qashani
Shabaka
Socarrat
Yeseria
Zellige





rooms



Andaruni
Harem
Qa’a
Zenana





garden



Bagh
Charbagh
Islamic garden
Mughal gardens
Ottoman gardens
Paradise garden
Persian gardens
Reflecting pool





outdoor

objects



Chhatri
Eidgah
Howz
Shading Umbrellas
Mechouar
Sebil
Shadirvan








types




religious



Dargah
Gongbei
Jama Masjid
Jama'at Khana
Khanqah
Külliye
Madrasa
Maqam
Maqbara
Mazar
Mosque
Musalla
Qubba
Rauza
Surau
Tekyeh
Türbe
Zawiya





civilian



Baradari
Bazaar
Caravanserai
Dar al-Shifa
Ghorfa
Kasbah
Mahal
Medina quarter
Souq
Turkish bath
Well house





military



Albarrana tower
Alcazaba
Alcázar
Amsar
Bab
Kasbah
Ksar
Qalat
Ribat








resources



Aga Khan Award for Architecture
ArchNet





influences



Indo-Saracenic Revival
Influences on Western architecture
Moorish Revival






Part of Islamic arts










v
t
e


Islamic art



Architecture




Regional styles



Ayyubid
Azerbaijani
Chinese
Indo-Islamic
Indonesian
Moorish
Moroccan
Mudéjar
Mughal
Ottoman
Pakistani
Persian
Somali
Sudano-Sahelian
Tatar
Timurid
Umayyad





Elements



Ablaq
Banna'i
Iwan
Jali
Mashrabiya
Mihrab
Minaret
Mocárabe
Muqarnas
Yeseria
See also Decoration











Arts




Regional styles



Persian (Early, Qajar, Safavid)
Turkish (Ottoman)





Carpets



Gul
Kilim

Motifs


Persian
Turkish
Prayer





Pottery



Azulejo
Fritware
Hispano-Moresque
İznik
Lustreware
Persian
Chinese influence





Textiles



Batik
Damask
Ikat
Embroidery
Soumak
Suzani





Woodwork



Khatam
Minbar





Other media



Brass
Damascus steel
Glass
Hardstone carving
Ivory carving
Stained glass

Shabaka










Arts of

the book




Miniatures



Arabic
Mughal
Ottoman
Persian





Calligraphy



Arabic
Diwani
Kufic
Muhaqqaq
Naskh
Nastaʿlīq
Persian
Sini
Taʿlīq
Thuluth
Tughra





Other arts



Muraqqa
Hilya
Ottoman illumination








Decoration



Arabesque
Geometric patterns
Girih (tiles)
Zellige





The garden



Charbagh
Mughal
Ottoman
Paradise
Persian





Museums



Berlin
Cairo
Doha
Ghazni
Istanbul (Arts, Calligraphy Art)
Jerusalem (Islamic Museum, L. A. Mayer Institute)
Kuala Lumpur
London (British Museum, V&A)
Los Angeles
Marrakech (Museum, Majorelle Garden)
Melbourne
Paris (Arab World Institute, Louvre)
Singapore
Toronto (Aga Khan)
Tripoli





Principles,

influences



Islamic Art: Mirror of the Invisible World
Aniconism in Islam
Indo-Saracenic Revival
Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe
Influences on Western art

Grotesque
Moresque


Mathematics and architecture
Moorish Revival
Oriental carpets in Renaissance painting
Pseudo-Kufic
Stilfragen
Topkapı Scroll












v
t
e


Ornaments






Acanthus
Arabesque
Ball flower
Bead and reel
Dog-tooth
Egg-and-dart
Girih
Grotesque
Guilloché
Gul
Hood
Interlace
Margent
Meander
Millefleur
Molding
Moresque
Palmette
Rosette
Scroll
Strapwork
Zellige















v
t
e


Mathematics and art



Concepts



Algorithm
Catenary
Fractal
Golden ratio
Plastic number
Hyperboloid structure
Minimal surface
Paraboloid
Perspective

Camera lucida
Camera obscura


Projective geometry
Proportion

Architecture
Human


Symmetry
Tessellation
Wallpaper group








Forms



Algorithmic art
Anamorphic art
Computer art
4D art
Fractal art
Islamic geometric patterns

Girih
Jali
Muqarnas
Zellige


Knotting
Architecture

Geodesic dome
Islamic
Mughal
Pyramid
Vastu shastra


Music
Origami
Textiles
String art
Sculpture
Tiling





Artworks



List of works designed with the golden ratio
Continuum
Octacube
Pi
Pi in the Sky





Buildings



Hagia Sophia
Pantheon
Parthenon
Pyramid of Khufu
Sagrada Família
St Mary's Cathedral
Sydney Opera House
Taj Mahal





Artists




Renaissance



Paolo Uccello
Piero della Francesca
Albrecht Dürer
Leonardo da Vinci

Vitruvian Man


Parmigianino

Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror







19th–20th Century



William Blake

The Ancient of Days
Newton


Jean Metzinger

Danseuse au café
L'Oiseau bleu


Man Ray
René Magritte

La condition humaine


Salvador Dalí

Crucifixion
The Swallow's Tail


Giorgio de Chirico
M. C. Escher

Circle Limit III
Print Gallery
Relativity
Reptiles
Waterfall







Contemporary



Martin and Erik Demaine
Scott Draves
Jan Dibbets
John Ernest
Helaman Ferguson
Peter Forakis
Bathsheba Grossman
George W. Hart
Desmond Paul Henry
John A. Hiigli
Anthony Hill
Charles Jencks

Garden of Cosmic Speculation


Robert Longhurst
István Orosz
Hinke Osinga
Hamid Naderi Yeganeh

A Bird in Flight
Boat


Tony Robbin
Oliver Sin
Hiroshi Sugimoto
Daina Taimina
Roman Verostko








Theorists




Ancient



Polykleitos

Canon


Vitruvius

De architectura







Renaissance



Luca Pacioli

De divina proportione


Piero della Francesca

De prospectiva pingendi


Leon Battista Alberti

De pictura
De re aedificatoria


Sebastiano Serlio

Regole generali d'architettura


Andrea Palladio

I quattro libri dell'architettura


Albrecht Dürer

Vier Bücher von Menschlicher Proportion







Romantic



Frederik Macody Lund

"Ad Quadratum"


Jay Hambidge

"The Greek Vase"


Samuel Colman

"Nature's Harmonic Unity"







Modern



Owen Jones

The Grammar of Ornament


Ernest Hanbury Hankin

The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art


G. H. Hardy

A Mathematician's Apology


George David Birkhoff

Aesthetic Measure


Douglas Hofstadter

Gödel, Escher, Bach


Nikos Salingaros

The 'Life' of a Carpet










Publications



Journal of Mathematics and the Arts





Organizations



Ars Mathematica
The Bridges Organization
European Society for Mathematics and the Arts
Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science
Institute For Figuring
Museum of Mathematics





Related topics



Droste effect
Mathematical beauty
Patterns in nature
Sacred geometry








 Category










