





This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Perineology is a speciality dealing with the functional troubles of the three axes (urological, gynaecological and coloproctological) of the female perineum. The perineologist takes a holistic approach, using defect-specific and mini-invasive treatments.
First citation of the word Perineology[edit]
"The word perineology represents a neologism. Many specialties have split into subspecialties. From surgery and from gastroenterology derived proctology. The latter needs now an evolution, mainly for its functional aspects. The proctologist cannot restrict his competence to the posterior perineum, as the urologist and the gynaecologist, when evaluating the pelvic floor and its diseases, must take into account the posterior compartment. A unitary view of the pelvic organs function then creates a sort of superspecialty that must open new spaces to the research insuring to the patients more rational solutions. Perineology is then a medical branch of which we probably will hear talking more and more in the future." (G. Dodi, RICP 1990; 9: 113 )
References[edit]

Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 2002, 13(5):275-277.- Definition of Perineology - Restricted access full text
Urogynaecologia International Journal 2003, 17(2):79-86.- Definition of Perineology
Pelviperineology Vol 26, 1 2007 History of Pelviperineology
Editorial on Pelviperineology Vol 26, 3 2007: Perineology or Pelviperineology

External links[edit]

European Perineology Group - GEP Up to date information about this new speciality by the group who has defined the concept.
Pelviperineology The Open Access Journal who consider all the compartments of the pelvis and of the perineum, with the body around and the mind above, as a single unit.





