





This article uncritically uses texts from within a religion or faith system without referring to secondary sources that critically analyze them. Please help improve this article by adding references to reliable secondary sources, with multiple points of view. (May 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Kalyanananda (1874–1937) was a direct monastic disciple of Vivekananda, who had set up the Ramakrishna Mission Sevashrama at Kankhal, near Haridwar. As a monk of the Ramakrishna Order he took up service to the humanity as the most important philosophy in his life and practiced it for the benefit of the local population and the pilgrims. He spent thirty six years in Ramakrishna Mission Sevashrama Kankhal to serve the poor and afflicted. He was one of the pioneers to set up a hospital in a remote location for the poor, needy and the itinerant monks who did not have access to healthcare.[1]


Swami

Kalyanananda



Kalyanananda, a direct monastic disciples of Vivekananda and founder of Ramakrishna Mission Sevashrama, Kankhal



Native name
Kalyan Maharaj


Born
Dakshinaranjan Guha

Barishal, Bengal


Died
(1937-10-20)20 October 1937

Calcutta


Cause of death
Illness


Nationality
Indian


Other names
Kalyanananda, Kalyan Maharaj


Citizenship
India


Occupation
monk


Known for
Spiritual work


Notable work
Service as religion, serving famine affected in Kishangarh, serving old and sick monks and poor in Kankhal, establishing the Ramakrishna Mission in Kankhal and Rishikesh


Home town
Barishal, Bengal


Parent(s)
Umesh Chandra Guha (father)





Contents


1 Pre-monastic life
2 Monastic life
3 Last days
4 Contribution
5 References
6 Category



Pre-monastic life[edit]
Kalyanananda was born as Dakshinaranjan Guha in the year 1874 in Hanua village near Vazirpur town in Barishal district of East Bengal province (now Bangladesh). His father's name was Umesh Chandra Guha. He lost his father at an early age and was educated under the guardianship of his uncle. Extreme poverty compelled him to give up a formal education.[2]
Monastic life[edit]
Dakshinaranjan was inspired by the ideals of Vivekananda of leading a selfless life and service to poor and needy by looking upon them as manifestation of God. In 1898 he joined the newly established monastery of Ramakrishna Order, the Belur Math. He was initiated by Vivekananda and took his monastic vows under the name Kalyanananda.[2] He served an ailing Yogananda, another direct disciple of Ramakrishna, in his death bed.




Kalyanananda, a direct monastic disciple of Vivekananda


In 1899 when Vivekananda left for West a second time, Kalyanananda went for pilgrimage and for practicing austerities. In Benares he met Kedarnath Moulik who would later become famous as Achalananda, another monastic disciple of Vivekananda and the founder of Ramakrishna Mission Home of Service Benares. Together they were involved in serving the poor and needy in Benares and Kalyanananda developed initial exposure to Vivekananda's vision of practical Vedanta through this.[2] From Benares he went to Allahabad and got engaged in service activities. At Kishangarh in Jaipur, together with Swarupananda, another brother disciple, he got busy in providing relief to the local population affected by a famine. They fed about 300 people everyday which helped in alleviating the impact of the famine.[2] In 1901 he returned to Belur Math to meet Vivekananda who had come back from West. Vivekananda had requested him to work for the sick and ailing monks around the Rishikesh-Haridwar region as he himself was the witness to the plight of the people there in absence of any healthcare facility.[3] Vivekananda apparently told Kalyanananda, Kalyan, you will be a Paramhansa. Sarvagatananda of Vedanta Centre Providence, who as Brahmachari Narayan served Kalyanananda in Kankhal, used this statement as the title of the book on his reminiscences about Kalyanananda.[4]
With the help of Swarupananda, Kalyanananda was able to raise some funds for beginning the work of the Sevashrama in Kankhal near Haridwar in a rented premise consisting of two rooms in 1901. He also met Vivekananda and served him before the latter's death. Once he bought 20 kg of ice by walking over a distance of 8 km for Vivekananda. Vivekananda had told him the essence of practical Vedanta was service to the humanity with spirituality as the mainstay.[2] Kalyanananda followed this philosophy in practice by serving the patients as Gods or living manifestations of the divinity.[5]
Later he was joined in his work by another disciple of Vivekananda, Nischayananda. The two monks received enthusiastic support from Dhanraj Giri, the head of Kailash Ashrama monastery in Rishikesh, who had a good relationship with Vivekananda and Abhedananda. Because of the effort of Dhanraj Giri, the local monks began accepting the two disciples of Vivekananda as part of the fraternity. Along with service to the poor patients, the two swamis followed strict austere practices like begging their food from a satra or alms house so that they did not have to spend the funds available for personal expenses like food and clothing. Many monks of the Ramakrishna Order, including Brahmananda, Turiyananda and Shivananda, as well as householder disciples of Ramakrishna like Mahendranath Gupta, better known as "M", visited the Kankhal Sevashrama. Kalyanananda's daily routine consisted in personally visiting every patient in the hospital and get to know about the condition, sitting by their side and talking to them, visiting the kitchen, the wards, the garden, the cowshed, the library and the temple shrine.[6]
Last days[edit]
Last fifteen years of his life was spent in a shattered health owing to the strain of the excessive work.[2] He suffered from diabetes. In 1932 he traveled to Advaita Ashrama in Mayavati and also went to Mussoorie in 1937. He died on October 20, 1937 in Dehra Dun.
Contribution[edit]
In June 1901, Kalyanananda started the Sevashrama in rented huts at Kankhal with a few phials of medicine himself donned multiple roles as doctor, nurse, accountant and all. In 1903 the Mission was provided with funds for the purchase of a plot of land measuring along with a well for water supply, and in 1905 two permanent buildings were constructed on this land by the funds sponsored by Babus Bhajanlal Lohia and Harshima,Sukdevdas of Calcutta.[7]
The Sevashrama which started modestly over the years developed into a full-fledged hospital with many different sections and departments. During the initial stages Kalyanananda and Nischayananda had to do everything, from picking up patients from roadside and bringing them to the hospital to serving them in every possible way. Because of financial constraints, they had to do even the menial work of cleaning the hospital and patients and for this they were looked down upon by the local monks.[8] However this was eradicated through the efforts of Dhanraj Giri, the influential head of Kailash Ashrama, who knew Vivekananda and had great respect for him.
In 1902, Kalyanananda opened a branch centre of the sevashrama in Rishikesh. He set up a small dispensary there where poor local people and pilgrims used to come for treatment.[9]
The two disciples of Vivekananda also provided service to the pilgrims during Kumbha Mela in Haridwar in 1903, 1915, and 1927. Kalyanananda also started a library for the public in 1905 for providing education to labourers and their children.[2] He started a school in the colony of the scavengers and other backward classes. He also provided drinking water to people who lived nearby and personally gave monetary and pecuniary help to poor and needy.[2] Vivekananda had asked Kalyanananda never to return to Bengal. Therefore he never went back to Belur Math despite repeated summonses.[8]
Kalyanananda's philosophy was to look upon the hospital as a place of worship and the patients as God. He would often wake up at night and accompanied by a faithful dog, went to pay a visit to the in-patient ward to check if anybody needed any service.[8] He planted 150 mango trees in the premises of the hospitals and he used to feed the monks and poor with the produce.[8] At least one person was known to have received regular monetary help from him. He himself used to sew the pillow covers and bed sheets of the patients in order to ensure an excellent quality of linen to them.[8] He used to keep every affairs of the hospitals, esp. pertaining to the services delivered to the patients under minute observations and sometimes used to do all tasks himself, including cleaning, when his staff were not present.[8]
References[edit]



^ "Demise of Swami Sarvagatananda". Vedanta Society Providence. 
^ a b c d e f g h Abjajananda, Swami (2003). Monastic Disciples of Swami Vivekananda. Mayavati: Advaita Ashrama. p. 231. ISBN 9788175052468. 
^ Genesis of Ramakrishna Mission Sevashrama, Kankhal
^ Reminiscences of Swami Kalyanananda, by Swami Sarvagatananda, publisher Vedanta Press, USA, ISBN 81-7505-271-6
^ Tathagatananda, Swami. "In Memoriam Swami Sarvagatananda" (PDF). American Vedantist. vedanta west communications inc. 
^ Sarvagatananda, Swami (2005). You will be a Paramahamsa. Kolkata: Advaita Ashrama. ISBN 8175052716. 
^ The First General Report of Ramakrishna Mission in 1912, published by Saradananda, Secretary
^ a b c d e f Mukherjee, Mani Sankar (Sankar) (2010). Abiswasya Vivekananda (Bengali). Kolkata: Sahityam. p. 271. ISBN 8172670486. 
^ Reminiscences of Swami Vivekananda by Swami Bodhananda



Category[edit]






v
t
e


Swami Vivekananda



Biography



Birthplace
Prayer to Kali at Dakshineswar
Baranagar Math
Swami Vivekananda's travels in India (1888–1893)
Teachers

Ramakrishna
Sarada Devi
Relationship with Ramakrishna


at the Parliament of the World's Religions (1893)
in California










Works and philosophy




Teachings and

philosophy



Teachings and philosophy
Vivekananda and meditation
Influence and legacy of Vivekananda
Neo-Vedanta





Books



Bibliography
Sangeet Kalpataru
Bartaman Bharat
Inspired Talks
Jnana Yoga
Karma Yoga
Lectures from Colombo to Almora
My Master
Raja Yoga
The East and the West





Poems/Songs



"Kali the Mother"
Khandana Bhava–Bandhana
"My Play is Done"
The Hymn of Samadhi
The Song of the Sannyasin
To the Fourth of July
Nachuk Tahate Shyama





Lectures



"Buddhism, the Fulfilment of Hinduism"
Christ, the Messenger
Religion not the crying need of India
Vedanta Philosophy





Miscellaneous



Arise, awake, and stop not till the goal is reached
Atmano mokshartham jagat hitaya cha
Bahujana sukhaya bahujana hitaya cha








Foundations



Advaita Ashrama
Belur Math
Ramakrishna Math
Ramakrishna Mission
Udbodhan
Vedanta Society (New York)





Disciples and friends




Monastic disciples



Shuddhananda
Virajananda
Swarupananda
Paramananda





Other disciples

and friends



Ajit Singh of Khetri
Alasinga Perumal
Emma Calvé
J. J. Goodwin
John Henry Wright
Josephine MacLeod
Sara Chapman Bull
Sister Christine
Sister Nivedita
Abhayananda
William Hastie








Memorials



Vivekananda Rock Memorial
National Youth Day (India)
Swami Vivekananda Airport
Swami Vivekananda Road metro station
Swami Vivekanand Nagar
Vivekanandar Illam
Vivekananda Setu
Swami Vivekananda statue (Golpark, Kolkata)
150th birth anniversary of Swami Vivekananda
Swami Vivekananda Youth Employment Week
Vivek Express





Artistic depictions




Films



Swami Vivekananda (1955)
Bireswar Vivekananda (1964)
Swami Vivekananda (1998)
Swamiji (2012)
The Light: Swami Vivekananda (2013)





Dramas



Biley
Bireswar








Educational institutions

named after Vivekananda



Chhattisgarh Swami Vivekanand Technical University
Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda University
Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Centenary College
Swami Vivekananda Subharti University
Swami Vivekanand University, Madhya Pradesh
Vivekanda Degree College, Kukatpally
Vivekananda Degree College, Puttur
Vivekananda Global University
Vivekananda Institution
Vivekananda Kendra Vidyalaya
Vivekananda Vidya Mandir





Books on Vivekananda



Swami Vivekananda on Himself
Life and Philosophy of Swami Vivekananda
Notes of some wanderings with the Swami Vivekananda
Swami Vivekananda: Messiah of Resurgent India
Swami Vivekananda in the West: New Discoveries
Pransakha Vivekananda
Rousing Call to Hindu Nation
The Master as I Saw Him





Researchers



Sankari Prasad Basu
Mani Shankar Mukherjee








 WikiProject
 Commons
 Wikiquote
 Wikisource texts










