





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (June 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)





Kermes oak





Scientific classification


Kingdom:
Plantae


(unranked):
Angiosperms


(unranked):
Eudicots


(unranked):
Rosids


Order:
Fagales


Family:
Fagaceae


Genus:
Quercus


Section:
Cerris


Species:
Q. coccifera


Binomial name


Quercus coccifera

L.





Distribution map


Synonyms[1]




List

Ilex aculeata Garsault
Quercus aquifolia Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus arcuata Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus brachybalanos Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus calliprinos Webb
Quercus chainolepis Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus consobrina Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus cretica Raulin ex A.DC.
Quercus dipsacina Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus dispar Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus fenzlii Kotschy
Quercus inops Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus mesto Boiss.
Quercus palaestina Kotschy
Quercus pseudococcifera Desf.
Quercus pseudorigida Kotschy ex A.Camus
Quercus recurvans Kotschy ex A.DC.
Quercus rigida Willd.
Quercus rivasmartinezii (Capelo & J.C.Costa) Capelo & J.C.Costa
Quercus sibthorpii Kotschy ex Boiss.
Quercus valida Kotschy ex A.DC.
Scolodrys rigida (Willd.) Raf.









Quercus coccifera - MHNT


Quercus coccifera, the kermes oak, is an oak in the Quercus section Cerris. It is native to the Mediterranean region and Northern African Maghreb, south to north from Morocco to France and west to east from Portugal to Cyprus and Turkey, crossing Spain, Italy, Libya, Balkans, and Greece, including Crete. The Kermes Oak was historically important as the food plant of the Kermes scale insect, from which a red dye called crimson was obtained.[2] The etymology of the specific name 'coccifera' is related to the production of red cochineal (crimson) dye and derived from Latin coccum which was from Greek κὀκκος, the kermes insect. The Latin -fera means 'bearer'.[3]



Contents


1 Description
2 Habitat
3 Distribution

3.1 Tree of the year 2014 in Cyprus


4 Gallery
5 See also
6 References



Description[edit]
Quercus coccifera is usually a shrub less than 2 metres (6.6 ft) high, rarely a small tree, reaching 1–6 metres (3.3–19.7 ft) tall (a 10 metres (33 ft) specimen recorded in Kouf, Libya[4]) and 50 cm trunk diameter. It is evergreen, with spiny-serrated coriaceous leaves 1.5–4 cm long and 1–3 cm broad. The acorns are 2–3 cm long and 1.5–2 cm diameter when mature about 18 months after pollination. They are held in a cup covered in dense, elongated, reflexed scales.







Leaves of Quercus coccifera









Leaves of Quercus coccifera




The kermes oak, Quercus coccifera is a scrub oak closely related to the Palestine oak (Quercus calliprinos) of the eastern Mediterranean, with some botanists including the latter in kermes oak as a subspecies or variety. The Palestine oak is distinguished from it by its larger size (more often a tree, up to 18 m) and larger acorns over 2 cm diameter.
Habitat[edit]




Flowering, Castelltallat.


It is associated with several asparagus species, Crataegus monogyna, Mediterranean dwarf palm, ephedra, myrtle, several species of Junipers (Juniperus, sabinas...), Pistacia terebinthus, mastic, wild Olea europea, sarsaparilla, Rhamnus atlantica, Rhamnus lycioides, Rhamnus oleoides, Rhamnus catharticus etc. The communities receiving several characteristic names.
It is indifferent to chemistry of soils, living on calcareous, pebbly, stony and poor soils. A lover of warm weather, it starts to fail from 1000 metres above sea level. It is capable of supporting the continental Mediterranean climate with extreme temperatures and low rainfall, replacing Quercus ilex (holm oak) in drier areas where it excels in drought resistance. It also grows on sea cliffs and in windy areas where other species of Quercus or Pinus cannot resist the harsh weather conditions.
Kermes oak species grow in dry, sunny slopes. Quercus coccifera supports either drought summers and semi-desert climate with rainfall between 400 and 600mm, with a maximum in the fall and spring. In its habitat summers are hot and winters are cold with the dry summer season with more than 35 °C, occasionally reaching over 40 °C. In winter the temperatures often drop below 0 °C. It lives in areas with moisture produced by condensation fogs, many Ground frost on clear nights and sporadic snowfalls.
A very hardy species, it grows well in all types of soils as a shrub, withstanding overgrazing.
It blooms from March to May in weather still wet. It is easily propagated by seed, an acorn that lies dormant until germinated by wet weather. This might occur anywhere from late summer to late autumn or early winter (October, November or December) of the following year. The acorns are very bitter, varying greatly in size and shape from one specimen to another and tasting bad. Acorns can germinate even before falling from the plant, but Quercus coccifera is also multiplied by root suckers and layering.
Kermes oaks have become scarce, due to their replacement in wet zones by larger species such as Holm oak. It has also suffered from extensive culling for use as charcoal. It is the only food and shelter for wildlife in some areas, such as the Ebro valley and other dry areas where chaparral replaces oaks due to low rainfall.
Populations typically occur in desert regions without any inhabited nucleus because crops are not economically profitable and the climate becomes progressively more continental and drier and therefore end in extreme temperatures accompanied by slow-growing dwarf juniper species. It is the last Quercus genus species to disappear when rainfall is lacking. Their ecological importance is as a habitat and food source in these areas (they have edible acorns, although with a very bitter taste) for nesting birds, foxes, rodents and wild boars. It forms thickets, thorny and dense, some recorded as tall as five meters. It is sometimes accompanied by other plant species of the same size and climber plants such as asparagus or zarzaparrilla.
Distribution[edit]




Quercus coccifera bush in coastal area


It is an important Mediterranean bush or dwarf vegetation, where the biome it dominates often bears its name (maquis, coscojar, garrigue, carrascal, chaparral, etc.). Q. coccifera form monospecific communities or communities integrated with Pinus, mediterranean buckthorns, Myrtus, Arecaceae, junipers, Pistacia, Rosmarinus, Thymus, etc.
It is located throughout the region around the Mediterranean Sea, especially in central southern and eastern halves, but is almost always missing from elevated and inland areas, with the exception of the semi-arid interior of the Ebro Valley (200 m above sea level) where it is the dominant species. It is similarly found on islands in the Mediterranean, from the Balearic Islands to Cyprus. It is common in Crete and can survive heavy sheep and goat grazing for long periods as a ground cover a few centimeters high. The same is true in Mallorca, Ibiza and the Iberian peninsula.
It is included as an endangered species in the Red Book of Bulgaria.[5]
It is called "chêne des garrigues" (garrigue oak) in French. The term "garrigue" comes from Catalan or Occitan "garric" (meaning "twisted") the name for Q. coccifera in those languages.
The common Spanish name of Q. coccifera is chaparro, which refers to its small size, a feature it shares with other oak species in similar habitats in other parts of the world, such as the chaparral communities from various parts of the Americas. The word chaparro comes from the Basque txapar meaning "little thicket".[6]
Tree of the year 2014 in Cyprus[edit]
The Cyprus Government has declared Quercus coccifera as the tree of the year 2014. A four-page leaflet has been published (www.moa.gov.cy/forest) with the code P.I.O. 212/2013, printed by the Government Printing Office. The name of the tree in Greek is Prinos or Pournari (Πουρνάρι).
Gallery[edit]







Trunk









Leaves




See also[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to Quercus coccifera.



Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub

References[edit]



^ The Plant List, Quercus coccifera L.
^ Young, Frank N. Jr; Kritsky, Gene (2002). A Survey of Entomology. San Jose: Writers Club Press. p. 9. ISBN 0-595-22143-2. 
^ http://www.thefreedictionary.com/cochineal
^ "Important bird areas fact sheet: Jabal al Akhdar". BirdLife International. Retrieved 2013-06-22. 
^ "Quercus coccifera". Red Book of Bulgaria, vol. 1. Retrieved 19 January 2017. 
^ "chaparral". Online Etymology Dictionary. Douglas Harper. Retrieved 2013-06-22. 










v
t
e


Sources of tannins



Sources of

condensed tannins



Areca catechu seed

arecatannins


Broad bean

Vicia faba


Grape

Vitis vinifera


Mimosa bark

Acacia mollissima


Myrtan or black marlock

Eucalyptus redunca


Quebracho wood





Sources of

hydrolysable tannins



Chestnut wood
Dhawa

Anogeissus latifolia


Myrobalan fruit

Terminalia chebula


Oak bark
Oak wood
Valonia oak

Quercus macrolepis


Sumac

Tanner's sumach leaves - Rhus coriaria or Chinese gall on Rhus chinensis


Tara pod

Tara spinosa







Other sources

by organ




Barks



General : Tanbark

Acacias (most notably Acacia pycnantha and Acacia decurrens)
Alder

Alnus sp


Avaram

Senna auriculata


Babul

Acacia nilotica


Birch

Betula sp


Button mangrove

Conocarpus erectus


Hemlock

Tsuga sp


Larch

Larix sp


Mangrove
Pine

Pinus sp


Spruce

Picea sp


Urunday

Myracrodruon urundeuva


Willow

Salix caprea







Leaves



Badan

Bergenia crassifolia


Gambier

Uncaria gambir


Redoul

Coriaria myrtifolia







Roots



Canaigre

Rumex hymenosepalus


Garouille

Quercus coccifera


Sea lavender

Limonium sp







Woods



Cutch

Senegalia catechu







Fruit



Divi-divi pod

Libidibia coriaria


Sant pod

Acacia nilotica


Teri pod

Moullava digyna







Galls



Gall oak

Quercus lusitanica
Quercus infectoria







Whole plant



Prosopis sp. bark and wood

Prosopis humilis
Prosopis nigra


Tanoak

Notholithocarpus


Tizra heartwood and root

Rhus pentaphylla







Undetermined organ



Anadenanthera colubrina (vilca)












Taxon identifiers



Wd: Q158178
APDB: 143317
BioLib: 127660
EoL: 2356789
EPPO: QUECC
GBIF: 2879175
GRIN: 30662
iNaturalist: 82942
IPNI: 295963-1
NCBI: 58335
PalDat: Quercus_coccifera
PfaF: coccifera Quercus coccifera
Plant List: kew-172199
POWO: urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:295963-1
Tropicos: 13100190
WCSP: 172199










