
Tomek Wilmowski

1. Tomek in the land of the kangaroos

2. Tomek on the Black Continent

3. Tomek on war path

4. Tomek traces Yeti

5. Tomek's secret expedition

6. Tomek among headhunters

7. Tomek at the source of Amazon

8. Tomek in Gran Chaco

9. Tomek in pharaohs' tombs'



Author
Alfred Szklarski


Country
Poland


Language
Polish


Genre
Adventure novel, young adult fiction


Published
1957 - 1994


No. of books
9


Tomek Wilmowski is a series of nine youth adventure novels written by Polish author Alfred Szklarski. The series was published from 1957 to 1994.
The title character, young traveller Tomek Wilmowski is the main protagonist of the novels. The books are stories about his adventures in different countries of the world. They are set in the beginning of 20th century. The other characters of the novels are Tomek's father Andrzej Wilmowski (geographer), sailor and comic relief of books Tadeusz Nowicki, mysterious traveller and animal hunter Jan Smuga, Australian friend and later Tomek's wife Sally Allan, his cousin Zbigniew Karski and his Russian wife Natasha. Tomek and his friends are Polish emigrants who must flee from the country under Russian occupation.
The books contain much geographical, historical, cultural and biological knowledge as well as humour and entertainment which is aimed at adolescents and young adults.
The series[edit]
1. Tomek in the land of the kangaroos (Tomek w krainie kangurów), 1957

First adventure of Tomek in Australia.

2. Tomek on the Black Continent (Tomek na Czarnym Lądzie), 1958

Second travel of Tomek and his friends to Kenya and Uganda, where the heroes want to catch wild animals to zoological garden.

3. Tomek on the warpath (Tomek na wojennej ścieżce), 1959

Vacation of Tomek in United States, where his friend Sally is staying and was kidnapped by Native Americans.

4. Tomek traces the Yeti (Tomek na tropach Yeti), 1961

Tomek and his father and friend, Tadeusz Nowicki are seeking the traveller Jan Smuga, who was lost in Tibet.

5. Tomek's secret expedition (Tajemnicza wyprawa Tomka), 1963

Tomek and his friend save Tomek's cousin, Zbigniew from Russian captivity.

6. Tomek among the headhunters (Tomek wśród łowców głów), 1965

Travel of Tomek and his friends to Papua New Guinea.

7. Tomek at the source of Amazon (Tomek u źródeł Amazonki), 1967

Tomek and his friends save Jan Smuga from Indian captivity in Brazil and chase the murderers of the owner of a plantation.

8. Tomek in Gran Chaco (Tomek w Gran Chaco), 1987

Further adventures in South America

9. Tomek in the Pharaohs' tombs (Tomek w grobowcach faraonów), 1994

Travel of Tomek and his friends to Egypt.

References[edit]





