
Drama




Author
Raina Telgemeier


Language
English


Genre
Graphic novel, coming-of-age, children's book


Published
September 1, 2012


Publisher
Scholastic/Graphix


ISBN
9780545326995


Drama is a graphic novel written by Raina Telgemeier, an American cartoonist, centers the story on Callie, a middle schooler and theater-lover who works in her school's drama production crew. While navigating seventh grade, she deals with tween hardship, including confusing crushes and budding friendships.
Drama is a coming-of-age story that explores themes of friendship, teamwork, inclusion, and determination through Callie and her relationship with the people around her.[1]
The novel has received both praise, in the forms of awards, and critiques. It has appeared in many challenges across the United States for inclusion of LGBTQ characters and what is deemed to be sexually explicit content, landing it in the list of the top 10 most challenged books.



Contents


1 Background
2 Summary
3 Reception and awards
4 Controversy
5 References



Background[edit]
In an interview with School Library Journal, author Raina Telgemeier responds to a question about her inspiration for the graphic novel by saying, "I wrote from life, I wrote from what I felt, I wrote from what I saw, I wrote from what I know."[2] Although Drama is a work of fiction, she draws from her personal experiences to create content. In high school, Telgemeier was in the choir and sang in the ensemble for many school plays, which ultimately drew her inspiration for writing Drama.[3] Several characters in the graphic novel are based off of real people. The gay twin brothers, Jesse and Justin, resemble two of Telgemeier's actual friends, and their in-book personalities mirror real life personalities.[2] Although Telgemeier originally intended the characters to be high schoolers, Scholastic believed the setting fit better for middle schoolers.[3]
The graphic novel itself combines both manga and comic forms, which the author frequently read while growing up.[3]
Summary[edit]
Drama follows Callie Marin, a seventh-grader at Eucalyptus Middle School. The novel opens with Callie and Greg, her long-time crush and the brother of one of her good friends, Matt. Callie confesses her feelings for Greg, and they share a kiss. In school, Callie joins the stage crew for the production of Moon over Mississippi as the set designer. Later, when she tries to find Greg, he blows her off before telling her that he and his ex-girlfriend, Bonnie, are hanging out again. The following week, Callie proposes her ideas for the set design and suggests making a cannon that actually has some explosion. There is some doubt voiced by her peers, but Callie promises to both them and herself that she can create one. Later on, while hanging up posters for the musical, Callie meets twins Justin and Jesse. Justin is eager to try out for the musical but Jesse tells Callie that he is too shy.
The next day, Callie and Matt are working on set design when Liz, another of Callie's good friends, asks them to accompany her to the basement because she is scared to go alone. On the way back up, they have an awkward exchange with Greg. Later on, Callie runs into the twins who invite her to go to the mall with them. Callie wants to walk past the baseball field with the two boys before leaving to make Greg jealous but it nearly backfires before Justin steps in. At the mall, Callie shows Jesse a book about set designs and describes her love for theatre production and her dreams for the future. As they wait for the twins' father to pick them up, Jesse and Justin sing one of the songs from the musical. Callie realizes that both boys have serious talent and urges Jesse to try out too, but he refuses. Callie then asks him to work on stage crew with her, which he enthusiastically accepts. The next day, an angry Matt confronts Callie, who is confused over his sudden aggression. At lunch, she sits with Justin, who tells Callie that he is gay. Callie is a little surprised, but accepting of him nonetheless.
The next day are auditions for the musical and Callie watches on with Jesse. The lead role is taken by West Redding, and Justin is upset. That night, Callie recalls how her love for theatre production began when her mother took her to see Les Miserables. The next day, Callie and the other stage crew members are working on set production when Jesse and her take a snack break and Jesse reveals how he wants Justin to have his time to shine. Some days later, the stage crew accompanies Liz down to the basement again, where they find Bonnie and West kissing. Sometime later, Liz and Callie are hanging out and working on the musical production when Callie confesses her crush on Jesse. Liz tells her to ask Jesse to the dance, and Jesse enters the room shortly after. That night, Callie texts Jesse and asks if he wants to go to the bookstore with her, to which he never replies. The next day, Jesse is waiting at her locker and accepts the request in person. After school, Callie meets up with Jesse and Justin and their father who takes them to the bookstore. Upon waiting to be picked up, Callie asks if the twins' father knows that Justin is gay, to which Justin tells her no. The next day, Callie runs into Greg again and they exchange conversation about the upcoming dance, which Callie wishes for Jesse to ask her to. Callie is then busy with preparing for the musical, going through rehearsals and successfully trying to figure out the cannon. When sales for the production are low, she demonstrates her cannon in front of the student body and generates a lot of excitement.
The opening night of the musical is a success, but the second night is marred after West breaks up with Bonnie. Bonnie locks herself in a supply closet after one of the acts and refuses to come back out. The stage crew is in panic before Jesse dresses up as a girl and goes on instead of Bonnie. He performs well and then he and West share a kiss. Jesse is praised for his performance and then asks Callie to the dance. At the dance, Jesse disappears for a long time before Callie finds him, talking to West outside. He implies to Callie that he is gay, and Callie storms off after he makes a comment about her falling in love with every nice guy. Callie bumps into Greg and they go for a walk, where Greg tries to kiss Callie again but she refuses. Later, Callie meets with Jesse where he apologizes and thanks her for helping him break out of his shell. Later, Matt confesses his crush on Callie that made him act out of jealousy and lash out. Afterwards, Liz forgives Callie for choosing a boy over her. At the end of the novel, the stage crew celebrates the success of the musical and Callie is named stage crew manager for the following year, much to her excitement.
Reception and awards[edit]
Drama has received largely positive reviews by book critics. Publishers Weekly said Drama is "another dead-on look at the confusing world of middle school, sweetly capturing all the drama swirling around the school production."[4] Booklist Review said "Telgemeier is prodigiously talented at telling cheerful stories with realistic portrayals of middle-school characters."[5] Ada Calhoun of the NY Times Book Review said that as a former tech director, she "can testify to the authenticity of Telgemeier’s backstage world, where friendship and romance flourish in the intimate monotony of snack runs, flat-painting and cue-calling."[1]
Drama has been named a Stonewall Honor Book in Children's and Young Adult Literature.[6]
Drama has been nominated for a Harvey Award.[7]
Controversy[edit]
Drama has been challenged by some parents and critics for being "sexually explicit" and for having "subject matter too advanced for elementary students."[8][9] In 2014, Drama made the American Library Association list of top 10 banned books due to a ban in Chapel Hill Elementary School in Mount Pleasant, Texas.[10] At Kirbyville Junior High in Kirbyville, Texas, the book was also banned for being "politically, racially, or socially offensive."[11] Its use has also been restricted in Seele Elementary School in New Braunfels, Texas.[9] Responding to criticism, Telgemeier has said she is "grateful Scholastic has been willing to stand behind me on Drama."[12]
Common Sense Media, an independent nonprofit that rates and reviews media by age-appropriateness, has marked Drama as appropriate for readers over 10 years of age. Common Sense Media acknowledges that "some readers may be uncomfortable with the graphic novel's depiction of homosexual crushes between young teens" but that "the author treats the subject with discretion."[13]
In response to backlash for portraying gay characters in a children's book, Telgemeier responded by saying "sexuality is a part of your identity that doesn’t necessarily apply to what you are doing with other people when you are eight or nine years old" and that she doesn't attempt to force her viewpoints on anyone.[2] She said that her "agenda is love and friendship. People will make of it what they will and I can’t let that sway the things I believe and the things I write about."[2]
References[edit]



^ a b Calhoun, Ada (2012-08-23). "'Drama,' by Raina Telgemeier". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2016-09-12. 
^ a b c d "Interview: Raina Telgemeier on 'Drama' — Good Comics for Kids". blogs.slj.com. Retrieved 2017-12-05. 
^ a b c "Interview with Raina Telgemeier | Teenreads". www.teenreads.com. Retrieved 2017-12-05. 
^ "Drama". Publisher Weekley. Retrieved 16 February 2016. 
^ "Summary/Reviews: Drama /". Buffalo & Eerie County Public Library. Retrieved 2016-09-12. 
^ "Stonewall Book Award List". American Library Association. Retrieved 18 February 2016. 
^ "Drama". GoRaina. Retrieved 16 February 2016. 
^ "Top Ten Frequently Challenged Books Lists of the 21st Century". American Library Association. Retrieved 18 February 2016. 
^ a b "Banned Books". ACLU of Texas. 2015-09-27. Retrieved 2016-09-12. 
^ "Case Study: Drama". Comic Book Legal Defense. Retrieved 17 February 2016. 
^ "Banned Books". ACLU of Texas. 2015-09-27. Retrieved 2017-11-13. 
^ Cavna, Michael. "'Persepolis,' 'Saga' and 'Drama' among 'Most Challenged' books in U.S. libraries". The Washington Post. 
^ "Drama - Book Review". Common Sense Media. Retrieved 2016-09-12. 







