
Forest of the Pygmies




Author
Isabel Allende


Original title
El Bosque de los Pigmeos


Translator
Margaret Sayers Peden


Language
Spanish


Series
Las memorias del águila y el jaguar[1] (The Memories of the Eagle and the Jaguar)


Genre
Fantasy novel


Publisher
Plaza & James Editores (Spanish version)[2]



Publication date

2004[3]



Published in English

2005


Media type
Print (Hardback & Paperback)


Pages
224 (Spanish version)[2]


ISBN
84-01-34180-9 (Spanish version)[2]


OCLC
58725253


Preceded by
Kingdom of the Golden Dragon


Forest of the Pygmies (Spanish: El Bosque de los Pigmeos) is a 2004 novel by Chilean novelist Isabel Allende is a threequel to City of the Beasts and Kingdom of the Golden Dragon.
Plot summary[edit]
Kate Cold, an International Geographic reporter, is on safari in Kenya with her grandson Alex and his friend Nadia. They soon meet Angie Ninderera, a bold and seductive pilot, and Brother Fernando, a Catholic missionary who needs to reach a jungle-girt village called Ngoubé; its people are tended to by his friars. In a recent letter his friars described him their toil and the dangers they were facing due to the chiefs’ disesteem for their presence. Some time ago these chiefs—King Kosongo, commandant Mbembelé and sorcerer Sombe—seized Ngoubé, toppled its queen, and subjected its people to ceaseless attrition. Kate and her friends agree to help despite Fernando’s and Angie’s rows.
Once in the village, they masquerade as reporters who wish to interview the king on his “famed power and wisdom,” but Kosongo has them locked in a sentineled, empty hut. Nadia slinks out to the village’s women, who have been living in jail while the males have become cruel spies. She and Alex flee to find the queen and the pygmies, who all vow to mutiny.
A fleet-footed pygmy duels and tires the commandant, who is chased off by Alex in his jaguar form. Sombe appears to quell the revolt, but Nadia appears along with the queen and a group of powerful friends. The foe is vanquished, and when Angie removes his mask, it turns out that he, Mbembelé and Kosongo are one. The man is tossed to the crocodiles.
Fernando says he will help the locals rebuild their lives, and Angie succeeds in phoning a friend of hers, who agrees to pick up her and the others.
Two years later: Alexander is a medical student at Berkeley, and Nadia is at last willing to go to college, too. He lands in New York, where Nadia and Kate share a flat, to take his friend to a ceremony. It turns out that Kate has written three books on their adventures.
External links[edit]

Allende pours on the magic by San Francisco Chronicle
Review about "Forest of the Pygmies"
Forest of the Pygmies on amazon.com
Book excerpt

References[edit]



^ Terra.org (Spanish)
^ a b c Google Books
^ Forest frame









v
t
e


Isabel Allende



Books



The House of the Spirits
The Porcelain Fat Lady
Eva Luna
The Stories of Eva Luna
The Infinite Plan
Paula
Daughter of Fortune
Portrait in Sepia
City of the Beasts
Kingdom of the Golden Dragon
Zorro
Inés of My Soul
Forest of the Pygmies
Island Beneath the Sea
Maya's Notebook





Related



Paula Frías Allende (daughter)










