





This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful. (September 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Kim Parlee (born 1970) is Vice-President at TD Wealth and host of Business News Network's MoneyTalk and MoneyTalk Life (www.tdwealthmedia.com) Before joining TD, Parlee was an anchor on BNN: Business News Network[1] (previously Report on Business Television) for 11 years. She hosted shows including Business Day, SqueezePlay, Stars and Dogs, After Hours, Talking Tax. Since starting with the channel in 2001, she has worked in a number of capacities including anchor, markets editor and technology reporter and has conducted over 10,000 interviews. Prior to ROBTV/BNN, Parlee worked with CBC Newsworld, worked in strategy and finance with a number of blue chip companies in Canada and abroad, and taught marketing at Dalhousie University.
Parlee holds an International MBA from the Schulich School of Business and a commerce degree from the University of Guelph. She serves on the advisory board for the University of Guelph's College of Business Economics and previously served on the board of the Loran Scholars Foundation.
Her last day as a host of BNN Business News Network’s Business Day was September 7, 2012.
She went on to join TD Wealth as Vice-President in 2012, and as part of her work, began hosting MoneyTalk on BNN. She is also the editor-in-chief of www.Moneytalkgo.com - an online investing and personal finance magazine published by TD Wealth.
References[edit]



^ Rea, Bill (2009-05-28). "Annual super learning was fun at King's College". Caledon Citizen. Archived from the original on 2011-10-03. Retrieved 2011-04-02. 








This article about a Canadian journalist is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e









