





This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



In poker, an isolation play is usually a raise designed to encourage one or more players to fold, specifically for the purpose of making the hand a one-on-one contest with a specific opponent. For example, if an opponent raises and a player suspects he is holding a weak, but playable hand, they may reraise to pressure other opponents to fold, with the aim of getting heads up with the opening raiser.
Isolation plays are most common against overly-aggressive players ("maniacs") who frequently play inferior hands, or with players who may have a drawing hand. Isolation plays are also common in tournaments to isolate a player who is "short stacked", that is, one who is in imminent danger of elimination, and so is likely to be playing aggressively out of desperation. However, when a player is extremely short stacked compared to the rest of the field in a tournament, making him bust will sometimes be more profitable than winning his chips, so inducing overcalls from other players trumps isolation play.[1]
Isolating is encouraged when holding a hand that fares better heads up than in a multi-way pot. For instance, when a player has a small pocket pair he may raise a large amount simply to knock out other players because typically a small pocket pair is about 50–60% likely to win an all-in pot in a heads up situation, but less likely when facing multiple opponents.
See also[edit]

Protection (poker)
Poker jargon

References[edit]



^ [1] Archived February 8, 2012, at the Wayback Machine.









v
t
e


Poker






Index of poker articles
Outline of poker





Overview



Betting
Cheating
Glossary
History

Poker boom


Tournaments





Play




Elements



Chip
Position
Pot
Playing card
Hands

Non-standard


Tell





Plays



Aggression
Bluff
Check-raise
Draw
Isolation
Protection
Steal








Variations



Draw poker

five-card draw


Stud poker

five-card stud
seven-card stud


Community card poker

Texas hold 'em
Omaha hold 'em
Greek hold 'em
Six-plus hold 'em


Three card poker

three card brag


Four card poker
Chinese poker

Open-face Chinese poker







Strategy



Fundamental theorem of poker
Morton's theorem
Pot odds
Slow play





Computing



Computer poker player
Online poker
Poker tools








 Category
 Commons
WikiProject









This poker-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e









