In Greek Mythology, Lycus /lʌɪkəs/ (Greek: Λύκος) was a ruler of the ancient city of Ancient Thebes (Boeotia). His rule was preceded by the regency of Nycteus, and he was succeeded by the twins Amphion and Zethus.



Contents


1 Genealogy
2 Regency of Thebes
3 References
4 External links



Genealogy[edit]
Lycus and his brother Nycteus were the sons of either Chthonius, one of the Spartoi,[1] or of the nymph Clonia and Hyrieus, the son of Poseidon and the Atlantid Alkyone,[2] or of Poseidon and the Pleiad Celaeno.[3] The two brothers fled from Euboea after they murdered King Phlegyas, settling in Hyria and then moving to Thebes, because they were friends with Pentheus, its king.[4]
Regency of Thebes[edit]
Pentheus's successor was Polydorus, who married Nycteis, the daughter of Nycteus. Nycteus served as regent for Labdacus, the son of Polydorus, when Polydorus died at a young age. Nycteus's daughter, Antiope, was impregnated by Zeus, and fled to Sicyon to marry King Epopeus.
Pausanias writes that Nycteus waged war on Epopeus, but in battle was wounded, and died after being carried back to Thebes, appointing Lycus as regent for Labdacus. Nycteus urged Lycus to continue to attack Epopeus, and to retake and punish Antiope. Epopeus died of a wound just as Nycteus did, and his heir Lamedon gave Antiope up freely to avoid war.[5]
The author of the Bibliotheca, however, writes that Lycus was the one chosen regent after the deaths of Pentheus and Labdacus. Nycteus killed himself from shame when he discovered Antiope's pregnancy, and Lycus initiated the attack because he himself desired to punish her, successfully carrying her off after the battle.[1]
In either case, Antiope gave birth to the twins Amphion and Zethus on the way back to Thebes, at Mount Cithaeron. Lycus abandoned the babies, leaving them with shepherds.
Once he returned to Thebes, Lycus gave Antiope to his wife, Dirce, who treated her cruelly. After many years Antiope escaped and found her sons, who returned to Thebes to kill Lycus and Dirce and take command of the city.[6] According to Euripides, Hermes forbade the twins from killing Lycus, although he forced Lycus to give them Thebes.[7]
References[edit]



^ a b Bibliotheca 3.5.5.
^ Bibliotheca 3.10.1.
^ Tripp, Edward. "Crowell's Handbook of Classical Mythology." New York, Thomas Y. Crowell Company, 1970, p. 351.
^ Bibliotheca 3.5.
^ Pausanias. Description of Greece, 2.6.3
^ Pausanias. Description of Greece, 9.5.
^ Gantz, Timothy. Early Greek Myth. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993, p. 485.



External links[edit]

Pausanias
Apollodorus



Regnal titles


Preceded by

Nycteus
Regent of Thebes

(first regency)
Succeeded by

Labdacus


Preceded by

Labdacus
King of Thebes

(second regency)
Succeeded by

Amphion and Zethus








v
t
e


Kings of Thebes



Kings



Calydnus
Ogyges
Cadmus
Pentheus
Polydorus
Nycteus (regent for Labdacus) and Lycus I (regent for Labdacus)
Labdacus
Lycus I (regent for Laius)
Laius
Amphion and Zethus
Laius (second rule)
Creon
Oedipus
Creon (second rule) (regent for Eteocles and Polynices)
Polynices and Eteocles
Creon (third rule) (regent for Laodamas)
Lycus II (usurper)
Laodamas
Thersander
Peneleos (regent for Tisamenus)
Tisamenus
Autesion
Damasichthon
Ptolemy
Xanthos








In literature



Antigone
Antigone (Euripides)
The Bacchae
Herakles
Iliad
Oedipus
Oedipus at Colonus
Oedipus Rex
The Phoenician Women
Seven Against Thebes
The Thebans





Related articles



Thebes
Necklace of Harmonia








 Book:Theban Kings
 Category:Theban kings
 Portal:Ancient Greece










