





This article does not cite any sources. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)



Psychological subversion (PsychSub) is the name given by Susan Headley to a method of verbally manipulating people for information. It is similar in practice to so-called social engineering and pretexting, but has a more military focus to it. It was developed by Headley as an extension of knowledge she gained during hacking sessions with notorious early computer network hackers like Kevin Mitnick and Lewis de Payne.



Contents


1 Usage example
2 Scientific methodology
3 Classified thesis
4 References



Usage example[edit]
Headley often gave the following example[1] of the use of psychological subversion: Suppose the hacker needed access to a certain classified military computer called, say, IBAS. He would obtain the name of the base commander or other high-ranking official, gain access to the DNS network, (which is the separate military telephone network) and dial up the computer center he needed to reach, which was often in a secured facility. The person who answered the phone would usually be a low-ranking enlisted person, and the hacker would say something like, "This is Lieutenant Johanson, and General Robertson cannot access his IBAS account, and he'd like to know WHY?" This is all said in a very threatening tone of voice, clearly implying that if the general can't get into his account right away, there will be severe negative repercussions, most likely targeting the hapless person who answered the phone.
The hacker has the subject off guard and very defensive, wanting nothing more than to appease the irritated general as quickly as possible. The hacker then goes silent, giving the victim ample time to stammer into the phone and build up his fear level, while listening for clues from the victim as to how best to proceed. Eventually, the hacker suggests that the tech create a temporary account for the general, or change the general's password to that of the hacker's choice.
The hacker would then have gained access to a classified military computer. It is important to note that this technique would not work any more, in no small part thanks to Headley's teaching of the military agencies about such methods during the 1980s.[citation needed]
Scientific methodology[edit]
While pretexting methods and so-called social engineering are based on on-the-fly adaptations during a phone call made to the victim with very little pre-planning or forethought, the practice of PsychSub is based on the principles of NLP and practical psychology. The goal of the hacker or attacker who is using PsychSub is generally more complex and involves preparation, analysis of the situation, and careful thought about what exact words to use and the tone of voice in which to use them.
Classified thesis[edit]
Headley's thesis entitled "The Psychological Subversion of Trusted Systems" was classified by the DOD in 1984 and so far has not seen the light of day. As a result, further information about PsychSub is generally unavailable outside of Headley's own seminars on the subject during the 1980s at CIA technology and spycraft-type seminars such as Surveillance Expo.
References[edit]


^ DEF CON III Archives


(1) Headley's talk at a hacker convention in Las Vegas






v
t
e


Psychological manipulation




Rewarding: pleasant

(positive reinforcement)




Attention
Bribery
Child grooming
Flattery
Gifts
Ingratiation
Love bombing
Nudging
Praise
Seduction
Smiling
Superficial charm
Superficial sympathy






Aversive: unpleasant

(positive punishment)




Anger
Character assassination
Crying
Emotional blackmail
Fearmongering
Frowning
Glaring
Guilt trip
Inattention
Intimidation
Nagging
Nit-picking criticism
Passive aggression
Relational aggression
Sadism
Shaming
Silent treatment
Social rejection
Swearing
Threats
Victim blaming
Victim playing
Yelling





Intermittent or partial

negative reinforcement



Climate of fear
Traumatic bonding





Other techniques



Bait-and-switch
Deception
Denial
Deprogramming
Disinformation
Distortion
Diversion
Divide and rule
Double bind
Entrapment
Evasion
Exaggeration
Gaslighting
Good cop/bad cop
Indoctrination
Low-balling
Lying
Minimisation
Moving the goalposts
Pride-and-ego down
Rationalization
Reid technique
Setting up to fail
Trojan horse
You're either with us, or against us





Contexts



Abuse
Abusive power and control
Advertising
Bullying
Catholic guilt
Confidence trick
Guilt culture
Interrogation
Jewish guilt
Jewish mother stereotype
Moral panic
Media manipulation
Mind control
Mind games
Mobbing
Propaganda
Salesmanship
Scapegoating
Shame culture
Smear campaign
Social engineering (blagging)
Spin
Suggestibility
Whispering campaign





Related topics



Antisocial personality disorder
Assertiveness
Blame
Borderline personality disorder
Carrot and stick
Dumbing down
Enabling
Fallacy
Femme fatale
Gaming the system
Gullibility
Histrionic personality disorder
Impression management
Machiavellianism
Narcissism
Narcissistic personality disorder
Personal boundaries
Persuasion
Popularity
Projection
Psychopathy










