"Con man" and "Scam" redirect here. For other uses, see Con Man (disambiguation), Confidence man (disambiguation), and Scam (disambiguation).
"Confidence game" redirects here. For the 2016 film, see Confidence Game (film).






This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)







Political cartoon by JM Staniforth: Herbert Kitchener attempts to raise £100,000 for a college in Sudan by calling on the name of Charles George Gordon


A confidence trick (synonyms include confidence game, confidence scheme, ripoff, scam and stratagem) is an attempt to defraud a person or group after first gaining their confidence, used in the classical sense of trust. Confidence tricks exploit characteristics of the human psyche, such as credulity, naïveté, compassion, vanity, irresponsibility, and greed.



Contents


1 Terminology

1.1 Short and long cons


2 Stages of the con
3 Vulnerability to confidence tricks
4 See also
5 References
6 Further reading
7 External links



Terminology[edit]
The perpetrator of a confidence trick (or "con trick") is often referred to as a confidence (or "con") man, con-artist, or a "grifter". Samuel Thompson (1821–1856) was the original "confidence man". Thompson was a clumsy swindler who asked his victims to express confidence in him by giving him money or their watch rather than gaining their confidence in a more nuanced way. A few people trusted Thompson with their money and watches.[1] Thompson was arrested in July 1849. Reporting about this arrest, Dr. James Houston, a reporter of the New York Herald, publicized Thompson by naming him the "Confidence Man".[2] Although Thompson was an unsuccessful scammer, he gained reputation as a genius operator mostly because Houston's satirical writing wasn't understood as such.[2] The National Police Gazette coined the term "confidence game" a few weeks after Houston first used the name, the "confidence man".[2]
 A confidence trick is also known as a con game, a con, a scam, a grift, a hustle, a bunko (or bunco), a swindle, a flimflam, a gaffle or a bamboozle. The intended victims are known as "marks", "suckers", or "gulls" (i.e., gullible). When accomplices are employed, they are known as shills.
Short and long cons[edit]
A short con or small con is a fast swindle which takes just minutes. It typically aims to rob the victim of everything in his or her wallet.[3]
A long con or big con (also, chiefly British English: long game)[4] is a scam that unfolds over several days or weeks and involves a team of swindlers, as well as props, sets, extras, costumes, and scripted lines. It aims to rob the victim of huge sums of money or valuable things, often by getting him or her to empty out banking accounts and borrow from family members.[5]
Stages of the con[edit]
In Confessions of a Confidence Man, Edward H. Smith lists the "six definite steps or stages of growth" of a confidence game.[6] He notes that some steps may be omitted.

Foundation Work
Preparations are made in advance of the game, including the hiring of any assistants required.
Approach
The victim is contacted.
Build-up
The victim is given an opportunity to profit from a scheme. The victim's greed is encouraged, such that their rational judgment of the situation might be impaired.
Pay-off or Convincer
The victim receives a small payout as a demonstration of the scheme's effectiveness. This may be a real amount of money, or faked in some way. In a gambling con, the victim is allowed to win several small bets. In a stock market con, the victim is given fake dividends.
The Hurrah
A sudden crisis or change of events forces the victim to act immediately. This is the point at which the con succeeds or fails.
The In-and-In
A conspirator (in on the con, but assumes the role of an interested bystander) puts an amount of money into the same scheme as the victim, to add an appearance of legitimacy to the scheme. This can reassure the victim, and give the con man greater control when the deal has been completed.

In addition, some games require a "corroboration" step, particularly those involving a "rare item". This usually includes the use of an accomplice who plays the part of an uninvolved (initially skeptical) third party, who later confirms the claims made by the con man.[6]
Vulnerability to confidence tricks[edit]
Confidence tricks exploit typical human characteristics such as greed, dishonesty, vanity, opportunism, lust, compassion, credulity, irresponsibility, desperation, and naïvety. As such, there is no consistent profile of a confidence trick victim; the common factor is simply that the victim relies on the good faith of the con artist. Victims of investment scams tend to show an incautious level of greed and gullibility, and many con artists target the elderly, but even alert and educated people may be taken in by other forms of a confidence trick.[7]
Accomplices, also known as shills, help manipulate the mark into accepting the perpetrator's plan. In a traditional confidence trick, the mark is led to believe that he will be able to win money or some other prize by doing some task. The accomplices may pretend to be strangers who have benefited from performing the task in the past.
See also[edit]


Boiler room (business)
Charlatan
Confidence trick (books and literature)
Confidence trick (television and movies)
Counterfeit
Hijacked journals
List of con artists
List of confidence tricks
List of criminal enterprises, gangs and syndicates
Quackery
Racketeering
Ripoff
Scam baiting
Scams in intellectual property
Social engineering (security)
White-collar crime


References[edit]



^ Jean Braucher & Barak Orbach, "Scamming: The Misunderstood Confidence Man," 27 Yale Journal of Law & Humanities 249 (2015)
^ a b c Braucher & Orbach.
^ David Maurer, The Big Con Archived 2016-06-24 at the Wayback Machine., Chapter Eight: "Short-Con Games"
^ Yagoda, Ben (June 5, 2012). "'The long game'". Not One-off Britishisms. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014.  This language blog, while not a reliable etymological source, provides statistically gathered usage data that demonstrates neutral as well as critical usage, and that it is of British origin, only recently making notable inroads into American English.
^ Amy Reading, The Mark Inside: A Perfect Swindle, a Cunning Revenge, and a Small History of the Big Con Archived 2016-05-15 at the Wayback Machine., Chapter One: "Confidence" ISBN 978-0-307-47359-2
^ a b Edward H. Smith, Confessions of a Confidence Man: A Handbook for Suckers Archived 2016-04-24 at the Wayback Machine., p. 35-37.
^ Crimes-of-persuasion.com Archived 2007-04-15 at the Wayback Machine. Fraud Victim Advice / Assistance for Consumer Scams and Investment Frauds



Further reading[edit]

Bell, J. Bowyer; Whaley, Barton (1982). Cheating and Deception (reprint 1991). New Brunswick (USA), London (UK): Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0-88738-868-X. 
Blundell, Nigel (1984) [1982]. The World's Greatest Crooks and Conmen and other mischievous malefactors. London: Octopus Books. ISBN 0-7064-2144-2. 
Dillon, Eamon (2008) [2008]. The Fraudsters: Sharks and Charlatans - How Con Artists Make Their Money. Merlin Publishing. ISBN 978-1-903582-82-4. 
Ford, Charles V. (1999) [1999]. Lies! Lies!! Lies!!!: The Psychology of Deceit. American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. ISBN 978-0-88048-997-3. 
Henderson, Les (2000). Crimes of Persuasion: Schemes, scams, frauds. Coyote Ridge Publishing. ISBN 0-9687133-0-0. 
Kaminski, Marek M. (2004). Games Prisoners Play. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11721-7. 
Konnikova, Maria (2016). The Confidence Game: Why We Fall for It...Every Time. ISBN 978-0525427414. 
Maurer, David W. (1999) [1940]. The Big Con: The Story of the Confidence Man and the Confidence Game (reprinted). New York: Bobbs Merrill / Anchor Books. ISBN 0-385-49538-2. 
Maurer, David W. (1974). The American Confidence Man. Springfield: Charles C. Thomas, Publisher. ISBN 0-398-02974-1. 
Reading, Amy (2012). The Mark Inside: A Perfect Swindle, a Cunning Revenge, and a Small History of the Big Con. New York: Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-47359-2. 
Smith, Jeff (2009). Soapy Smith: The Life and Death of a Scoundrel. Juneau: Klondike Research. ISBN 0-9819743-0-9. 
Sutherland, Edwin Hardin (1937). The Professional Thief (reprint 1989). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-78051-1. 
Weil, J.R. "Yellow Kid" (1948) [2004]. Con Man: A Master Swindler's Own Story. New York: Broadway Books. ISBN 0-7679-1737-5. 
Zhang, Yingyu (2017). The Book of Swindles: Selections from a Late Ming Collection. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 9780231178631. 

External links[edit]



Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Common scams.



"Arrest of the Confidence Man" New York Herald, 1849
Dateline NBC investigation 'To Catch a Con Man'
The Blonger Bros. Lou Blonger was the head of a large gang of confidence men running the Big Con in 1910s Denver
Prepaid funeral scam, FBI
Confidence tricks in China







v
t
e


Types of fraud



Business-related



Billing
Cramming
Disability
Drug / Pharmaceutical
Email
Employment
Fixing
Impersonation
Intellectual property
Internet
Job
Long firm
Odometer
Phone
Quackery / Health care
Racketeering
Return
Tech support
Slamming
Telemarketing





Family-related



Marriage
Paternity





Financial-related



Advance-fee (Lottery scam)
Bank
Bankruptcy
Chargeback
Cheque
Credit card
Forex
Insurance
Mortgage
Securities
Shill bidding
Tax





Government-related



Benefit
Electoral
Medicare
Visa
Welfare





Other types



Affinity fraud
Charity
Confidence trick
Counterfeiting
Faked death
Forgery
Hoax
Impersonation
Mail and wire (honest services)
Romance

Bride scam


Scientific
Spyware
White-collar crime












v
t
e


Scams and confidence tricks



Terminology



Confidence trick
Error account
Shill
Shyster
Sucker list





Notable

scams and

confidence tricks



Advance-fee scam
Art student scam
Badger game
Bait-and-switch
Black money scam
Blessing scam
Bogus escrow
Boiler room
Bride scam
Bullet-planting scheme
Charity fraud
Clip joint
Coin-matching game
Coin rolling scams
Drop swindle
Embarrassing cheque
Employment scams
Extraterrestrial real estate
Fiddle game
Fine print
Foreclosure rescue scheme
Foreign exchange fraud
Fortune telling fraud
Gas leak phone call scam
Gem scam
Get-rich-quick scheme
Green goods scam
Hustling
Initial coin offering
Intellectual property scams
Kansas City Shuffle
Long firm
Miracle cars scam
Mock auction
Moving scam
Patent safe
Pig in a poke
Pigeon drop
Priority Development Assistance Fund scam
Pump and dump
Reloading scam
Rent-a-car scam
Salting
Shell game
Sick baby hoax
Slavery reparations scam
Spanish Prisoner
Strip search phone call scam
Swampland in Florida
Technical support scam
Telemarketing fraud
Thai tailor scam
Thai zig zag scam
Three-card Monte
Trojan horse
White van speaker scam
Work-at-home scheme





Internet scams

and

countermeasures



Avalanche
Carding
Catfishing
Click fraud
Clickjacking
Cramming
Cybercrime
CyberThrill
DarkMarket
Domain name scams
Email authentication
Email fraud
Internet vigilantism
Lottery scam
PayPai
Phishing
Referer spoofing
Ripoff Report
Rock Phish
Romance scam
Russian Business Network
SaferNet
Scam baiting
ShadowCrew
Spoofed URL
Spoofing attack
Stock Generation
Voice phishing
Website reputation ratings
Whitemail





Pyramid and

Ponzi schemes



Aman Futures Group
Bernard Cornfeld
Caritas
Dona Branca
Ezubao
Foundation for New Era Philanthropy
Franchise fraud
High-yield investment program (HYIP)
Investors Overseas Service
Earl Jones (investment advisor)
Kubus scheme
Madoff investment scandal
Make Money Fast
Matrix scheme
MMM
Petters Group Worldwide
Pyramid schemes in Albania
Reed Slatkin
Saradha financial scandal
Scott W. Rothstein
Stanford Financial Group
Welsh Thrasher faith scam





Lists



Con artists
Confidence tricks
Criminal enterprises, gangs and syndicates
Email scams
Impostors
In the media

Film and television
Literature


Ponzi schemes










