"Falsehood" redirects here. For other uses, see False (disambiguation).
See also: False (logic)
Falsity (from Latin falsitas) or falsehood is a perversion of truth originating in the deceitfulness of one party, and culminating in the damage of another party. Falsity is also a measure of the quality or extent of the falseness of something, while a falsehood may also mean simply an incorrect (false) statement, independent of any intention to deceive.
In the Frege–Church ontology, "truth" is the denotation of a true proposition, while "falsity" is the denotation of false propositions.
In Classical æsthetics, falsity is ugly, and truth is beautiful.
In existentialism, falsity is usually a thing to be avoided, and is not desired.[1]



Contents


1 Examples
2 See also
3 References
4 External links



Examples[edit]




Today, based upon inaccuracies and falsities, it is known the entire De Fonte article to have been a fabrication, however, it set 18th century afire with speculation that a Northwest Passage must indeed exist.



Counterfeiting money, or attempting to coin genuine legal tender without due authorization;
Tampering with wills, codicils, or such-like legal instruments;
Prying into the correspondence of others to their prejudice;
Using false weights and measures,
Adulterating merchandise, so as to render saleable what purchasers would otherwise never buy, or so as to derive larger profits from goods otherwise marketable only at lower figures;
Bribing judges,
Suborning witnesses;
Advancing false testimony;
Manufacturing spurious seals;
Forging signatures;
Padding accounts;
Interpolating the texts of legal enactments; and
Sharing in the pretended birth of supposititious offspring

are among the chief forms which this crime assumes.
See also[edit]

Deception
Fraud
Lie

References[edit]



^ Why I AM Not A Christian, Bertrand Russell



External links[edit]



Look up falsity or falsehood in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.



Catholic Encyclopedia "Falsity"

 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "article name needed". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton. 





This legal term article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.


v
t
e









