For other uses, see Chalice (disambiguation).






This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (January 2012)







Derrynaflan Chalice, an 8th- or 9th-century chalice, found in County Tipperary, Ireland


A chalice (from Latin calix, mug, borrowed from Greek κύλιξ (kulix), cup) or goblet is a footed cup intended to hold a drink. In religious practice, a chalice is often used for drinking during a ceremony or may carry a certain symbolic meaning.



Contents


1 Religious use

1.1 Christian

1.1.1 The Holy Chalice
1.1.2 Holy Grail


1.2 Unitarian Universalism
1.3 Wicca
1.4 Neo-Paganism
1.5 Rastafarian


2 Poisoned chalice
3 Heraldry
4 Gallery
5 Other usage

5.1 Québec
5.2 Czech Republic
5.3 The Balkans


6 See also
7 Notes
8 External links



Religious use[edit]
Christian[edit]




Fresco of a female figure holding a chalice at an early Christian Agape feast. Catacomb of Saints Marcellinus and Peter, Via Labicana, Rome.






Chalice with Saints and Scenes from the Life of Christ






Silver chalice in the museum of the Romanian Orthodox Archbishopy of the Vad, Feleac, and Cluj


The ancient Roman calix was a drinking vessel consisting of a bowl fixed atop a stand, and was in common use at banquets. In Roman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy, Anglicanism, Lutheranism and some other Christian denominations, a chalice is a standing cup used to hold sacramental wine during the Eucharist (also called the Lord's Supper or Holy Communion). Chalices are often made of precious metal, and they are sometimes richly enamelled and jewelled. The gold goblet was symbolic for family and tradition.
Chalices have been used since the early church. Because of Jesus' command to his disciples to "Do this in remembrance of me." (Luke 22:19), and Paul's account of the Eucharistic rite in 1 Corinthians 11:24-25, the celebration of the Eucharist became central to Christian liturgy. Naturally, the vessels used in this important act of worship were highly decorated and treated with great respect. A number of early examples of chalices have a large bowl and two handles. Over time, the size of the bowl diminished and the base became larger for better stability. Over time, official church regulations dictated the construction, blessing, and treatment of chalices. Some religious traditions still require that the chalice, at least on the inside of the cup, to be gold-plated.[1]
In Western Christianity, chalices will often have a pommel or node where the stem meets the cup to make the elevation easier. In Roman Catholicism, chalices tend to be tulip-shaped, and the cups are quite narrow. Roman Catholic priests will often receive chalices from members of their families when first ordained.
In Eastern Christianity (Oriental Orthodox, Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic churches), chalices will often have icons enameled or engraved on them, as well as a cross. In Orthodoxy and Eastern Catholicism, all communicants receive both the Body of Christ and the Blood of Christ. To accomplish this, a portion of the Lamb (Host) is placed in the chalice, and then the faithful receive Communion on a spoon. For this reason, eastern chalices tend to have larger, rounded cups. In the Russian Orthodox Church, the faithful will often kiss the "foot" (base) of the chalice after receiving Holy Communion. In other traditions, they will kiss the cup. Although Orthodox monks are not permitted to hold personal possessions, the canons permit a hieromonk (i.e., a monk who has been ordained to the priesthood) to keep a chalice and other vessels necessary to celebrate the Divine Liturgy.
In the early and medieval church, when a deacon was ordained, he would be handed a chalice during the service as a sign of his ministry. Early written accounts of the ordination of deaconesses also reflect this practice.[citation needed] In the West the deacon carries the chalice to the altar at the offertory; in the East, the priest carries the chalice and the deacon carries the paten (diskos). Only wine, water and a portion of the Host are permitted to be placed in the chalice, and it may not be used for any profane purpose.
The chalice is considered to be one of the most sacred vessels in Christian liturgical worship, and it is often blessed before use. In the Roman Catholic Church, and some Anglo-Catholic churches, it was the custom for a chalice to be consecrated by being anointed with chrism, and this consecration could only be performed by a bishop or abbot (only for use within his own monastery).[2] Among the Eastern Churches there are varying practices regarding blessing. In some traditions the very act of celebrating the Sacred Mysteries (Sacrament) is the only blessing necessary; in others, there is a special rite of blessing. In some Eastern traditions this blessing may be done only by a bishop, in some it may be done by a priest. In any case, in both the East and the West, once a chalice has been blessed, it may only be touched by an ordained member of the higher clergy (bishop, priest or deacon). In the Russian Orthodox Church a subdeacon is permitted to touch the holy vessels, but only if they are wrapped in cloth.
The Holy Chalice[edit]




Chalice with the inscription: "Sanguinis meus vere est potus" (i.e. 'My blood is drink indeed' (John 6:55, KJV)), made for the church St John the Baptist in Salinas, Spain.


Main article: Holy Chalice
In Christian tradition the Holy Chalice is the vessel which Jesus used at the Last Supper to serve the wine. New Testament texts make no mention of the cup except within the context of the Last Supper and give no significance whatsoever to the object itself. Herbert Thurston in the Catholic Encyclopedia 1908 concluded that "No reliable tradition has been preserved to us regarding the vessel used by Christ at the Last Supper. In the sixth and seventh centuries pilgrims to Jerusalem were led to believe that the actual chalice was still venerated in the church of the Holy Sepulchre, having within it the sponge which was presented to Our Saviour on Calvary." Several surviving standing cups of precious materials are identified in local traditions as the Chalice.
Holy Grail[edit]
Main article: Holy Grail
An entirely different and pervasive tradition concerns the cup of the Last Supper. In this highly muddled though better-known version, the vessel is known as the Holy Grail. In this legend, Jesus used the cup at the Last Supper to institute the Mass. Other stories claim that Joseph of Arimathea used the cup to collect and store the blood of Christ at the Crucifixion.
Unitarian Universalism[edit]
At the opening of Unitarian Universalist worship services, many congregations light a flame inside a chalice.[3] A flaming chalice is the most widely used symbol of Unitarianism and Unitarian Universalism (UU), and the official logo of the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) and other Unitarian and UU churches and societies.[4] The design was originated by the artist Hans Deutsch, who took his inspiration from the chalices of oil burned on ancient Greek and Roman altars. It became an underground symbol in occupied Europe during World War II for assistance to help Unitarians, Jews, and other people escape Nazi persecution.[5] The chalice is often shown surrounded by two linked rings. The two linked rings were used as an early symbol for the Unitarian Universalist Association, signifying the joining of Unitarianism and Universalism.
There is no standardized interpretation of the flaming chalice symbol. In one interpretation, the chalice is a symbol of religious freedom from the impositions of doctrine by a hierarchy and openness to participation by all; the flame is interpreted as a memorial to those throughout history who sacrificed their lives for the cause of religious liberty. In another interpretation, the flaming chalice resembles a cross, symbolic of the Christian roots of Unitarian Universalism.[6]
Wicca[edit]
Main article: Magical tools in Wicca
In Wicca, a chalice, as a feminine principle, is often used in combination with the Athame (ceremonial black-handled knife), as male principle. Combining the two evokes the act of procreation, as a symbol of universal creativity. This is a symbol of the Great Rite in Wiccan rituals. A chalice is also used in the Small Rite.
Neo-Paganism[edit]
Some forms of Neo-Paganism make use of chalices in their rituals as well. A chalice may be placed on an altar or on the ground. The chalice may contain wine, whiskey, water, or other liquids.
Rastafarian[edit]
Main article: Chalice (pipe)
Rastafaris engage in an activity called reasoning. This reasoning helps them shape attitudes towards "politics, theology, repatriation, and reparation."[citation needed] Participants discuss personal issues, but the focus is on the interaction of individuals and society, as well as issues such as ecology.
Such sessions include supervised use of ganja intended to put participants in touch with peaceful feelings, unity, and "consciousness." Rasta philosophy describes ganja-conscious humans "as the temple of God, within which God dwells."[citation needed] Using ganja is said to "stimulate this inner being through spiritual discourse."
In these sessions, ganja is smoked in joints or in a chalice (Waterpipe or bong), although Rasta witnesses said chalice smokers had to be very "mature and clean-spirited" due to the powerful hits delivered by this unique and potent form of inhalation device.
Poisoned chalice[edit]
The term "poisoned chalice" is applied to a thing or situation which appears to be good when it is received or experienced by someone, but then becomes or is found to be bad. The idea was referred to by Benedict of Nursia in one of his exorcisms, found on the Saint Benedict Medal: Vade retro Satana! Nunquam suade mihi vana! Sunt mala quae libas. Ipse venena bibas! (Begone Satan! Never tempt me with your vanities! What you offer me is evil. Drink the poison yourself!).

William Shakespeare uses the expression in Act I Scene VII of Macbeth. It occurs in the opening soliloquy of the scene when Macbeth is considering the ramifications of the murder he is plotting.


But in these cases

We still have judgment here; that we but teach

Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return

To plague the inventor: this even-handed justice

Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice

To our own lips.


It's also a term to describe coaching a sports team with a history of winning championships, one feels lucky to manage such a club but then ends up under pressure to win a championship, get a great result within the first year, or they're fired. (For example, teams like Real Madrid, Chelsea and Barcelona or Moyes at Manchester United, where managers have to win a tournament, a league trophy, qualify for Europe, or they're fired within their first year or any year they win nothing.)
Heraldry[edit]
Main article: Heraldry
The use of chalices as heraldic devices is not unusual, especially in ecclesiastical heraldry. A number of cities and regions also make use of the chalice. For instance, the coat of arms of the municipality of Fanas in the district of Prättigau/Davos in the Swiss canton of Graubünden bears a gold chalice on a solid blue background. The coat of arms of Staufen im Breisgau contains the three golden chalices (i.e. drei staufen in ancient German) of the Lords of Staufen (de), advocates of the monastery of St. Trudpert.
Gallery[edit]







Ceramic goblet from Navdatoli, Malwa, 1300 BC









Etruscan bucchero chalice, early 6th century BC









Treasure of Gourdon, 6th century AD









Tassilo Chalice, c. 780 (reproduction)









Ardagh Chalice, 8th century









Chalice with Apostles Venerating the Cross, Byzantine Empire (Walters Art Museum)









Palais du Tau, treasure of the Cathedral of Reims, 12th century









Chalice from Borgå Cathedral (Porvoo Cathedral), c. 1250









Medieval chalice from Our Lady's church, Trondheim, Norway









Baroque chalice with a paten









Modern chalice with paten









Large modern chalice and paten









Wine Goblet, mid-19th century. Qajar dynasty. Brooklyn Museum.




Other usage[edit]




Allegory of the Eucharist by Alexander Coosemans


Québec[edit]
Main article: Quebec French profanity
In French-Canadian culture, particularly in and around Quebec, the use of the names of holy objects such as "câlice" (a variation of calice, which is the French word for chalice) can be an alternate form of cursing. Somewhat equivalent to the American word "goddam" or the phrase "God damn it", the use of "câlice" or "tabarnak" (a variation of tabernacle) as an interjection is not uncommon in Quebec. For example: "Câlice! I forgot to lock the front door" or muttering "tabarnak" under your breath after you get a flat tire. Presumably a derivation of "taking the Lord's name in vain".[7]
Czech Republic[edit]
With reference on Hussite movement in the Kingdom of Bohemia, besides religious use chalice also became one of the unofficial national symbols of the Czechs. It is frequently used in Czech national symbolism and it is part of many historical banners.
The Balkans[edit]
In Serbo-Croatian, it has coined the word šalica, which means a glass cup.
See also[edit]

Ablution in Christianity
Ardagh Chalice
Ciborium
Communion under both kinds
Corporal (liturgy)
Derrynaflan Chalice
Holy Grail
Intinction
Paten
Tassilo Chalice
The Oxburgh Chalice
The Silver Chalice
Treasure of Gourdon

Notes[edit]



^ General Instruction of the Roman Missal 328
^ Thurston, Herbert (1908), "Chalice", The Catholic Encyclopedia, III, New York: Robert Appleton Company, retrieved 2008-06-13 
^ Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations (March 1, 2007), Our Symbol: the Flaming Chalice, retrieved 2007-07-19 
^ Unitarian Universalist Association,"The History of the Flaming Chalice"
^ uuworld.org—liberal religion and life, Wartime origins of the flaming chalice, retrieved 2007-07-19 
^ Unitarian Universalist Association (2007), The History of the Flaming Chalice 
^ Gordon, Sean (December 12, 2006). "Quebec swears by its English curses: But church-related expletives spoken in French not accepted on TV". Toronto Star



External links[edit]

 The dictionary definition of chalice at Wiktionary
 Media related to Chalices at Wikimedia Commons
"Chalice" article from the Catholic Encyclopedia
Stem glass classification
Wine Goblets Information Website
Material Culture of the Mendicant Orders in Ireland, a selection of photographs of and detailed information about religious artefacts, mainly chalices, belonging to the Irish Franciscans. A UCD Digital Library Collection.







v
t
e


Structure of the Mass of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church



Forms



Pre-Tridentine Mass
Tridentine Mass

Extraordinary form


Mass of Paul VI





Types



Low Mass
Missa Cantata
Solemn Mass
Pontifical High Mass
Papal Mass
Ritual Masses

Blue Mass
Chapter and Conventual Mass
Coronation Mass
Nuptial Mass
Red Mass
Requiem Mass


sine populo
Votive Mass





Order of Mass




Pre-Mass



Vesting prayers in the sacristy
Asperges me

Vidi aquam in Eastertide







Liturgy of

the Word



Sign of the Cross
Psalm 43
Entrance Antiphon
Penitential Rite

Confiteor / Kyrie


Gloria
Dominus vobiscum
Collect

Oremus


First Reading
Responsorial Psalm or Gradual
Epistle
Alleluia

Gospel verse / sequence


Gospel
Homily
Credo

Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed or Apostles' Creed


General Intercessions





Liturgy of

the Eucharist



Offertory

Orate fratres / prayer over the gifts


Preface

Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna


Eucharistic Prayer/Canon of the Mass

oblation / epiclesis / Words of Institution / elevation / anamnesis
texts and rubrics
Roman Canon

history


Eucharistic Prayer II


Memorial Acclamation
Lord's Prayer

embolism / doxology


Pax
Sign of peace
Agnus Dei
Fraction
Holy Communion

Communion antiphon


Ablutions
Postcommunion
Dismissal

Ite, missa est / Benedicamus Domino


Last Gospel





Post-Mass



Leonine Prayers
Recessional hymn








Participants



Acolyte
Altar server

female


Bishop
Boat boy
Cantor
Choir
Crucifer
Deacon
Extraordinary minister of Holy Communion
Laity

Eucharistic Congress


Lector
Priest
Subdeacon
Usher





Parts of the

Sanctuary / Altar



Altar crucifix
Altar rails
Ambo
Communion bench
Credence table
Kneeler
Lavabo
Misericord
Piscina
Tabernacle





Altar cloths



Altar linens
Antependium
Burse
Chalice veil
Corporal
Lavabo towel
Pall
Purificator





Candles and lamps



Altar candle
Altar candlestick
Paschal candle
Sanctuary lamp
Triple candlestick
Votive candle





Liturgical objects



Altar bell
Aspergillum
Censer
Chalice
Ciborium
Collection basket
Cruet
Flabellum
Funghellino
Holy water
Incense

use


Manuterge
Paten
Processional cross
Pyx
Sacramental bread

wafer


Sacramental wine (or must)
Thurible
Water





Liturgical books

of the Roman Rite



Ceremonial of Bishops
Evangeliary

Gospel Book


Graduale
Lectionary
Roman Missal





Vestments




Alb
Amice
Chasuble
Dalmatic
Episcopal sandals
Liturgical colours
Headcover
Humeral veil
Pallium
Pontifical
Stole
Surplice
Tunicle
Vimpa





Liturgical year

(Roman Calendar)



Advent
Christmastide
Ordinary Time
Septuagesima
Lent
Passiontide
Holy Week

Paschal Triduum


Eastertide
Ascensiontide





Eucharistic

discipline



Abstemius
Anima Christi
Concelebration
Church etiquette
Closed communion
Communion and the developmentally disabled
Communion under both kinds
Denial of Communion

Canon 915


Eucharistic fast
First Communion
Frequent Communion
Genuflection
Host desecration
Infant communion
Intinction
Reserved sacrament
Thanksgiving after Communion
Viaticum





Eucharistic

theology



Body and Blood of Christ
Corpus Christi (feast)
Crucifixion of Jesus and substitutionary atonement
Epiousios
Grace ex opere operato
In persona Christi
Historical roots of Catholic Eucharistic theology
Koinonia
Last Supper
Mirae caritatis
Mysterium fidei (encyclical)
Origin of the Eucharist
Real presence
Transubstantiation
Year of the Eucharist
Stercoranism





Regulations

and concepts



Ad orientem and versus populum
Calendar of saints
Canon law
Code of Rubrics
Commemoration
Ecclesiastical Latin
General Instruction of the Roman Missal
Holy day of obligation
Intercession of saints
Ordinary and propers
Pro multis
Sunday

Lord's Day


Vernacular





Related



Agape feast
Catholic liturgy
Christian prayer

effects of prayer


Congregation for Divine Worship
Council of Trent
Ecclesia de Eucharistia
Eucharistic adoration and benediction

Dominicae Cenae / Holy Hour


Eucharistic miracle
Fermentum
Fourth Council of the Lateran
Gelineau psalmody
Gregorian chant
History of the Roman Canon
Lex orandi, lex credendi
Liturgical Movement
Liturgical reforms of Pope Pius XII
Mediator Dei
Missale Romanum (apostolic constitution)
Pope Paul VI
Catholic theology
Sacraments of the Catholic Church
Second Vatican Council

Sacrosanctum Concilium


Summorum Pontificum
Tra le sollecitudini








 Catholicism portal












v
t
e


Order of the Divine Service in Lutheranism



Preparatory Service



Entrance hymn and Trinitarian formula (known as the Invocation)
Penitential Rite including the Confiteor and Declaration of Grace (or Asperges on Easter)





The Service of the Word



Introit
Gloria Patri
Kýrie
Gloria
Dominus vobiscum
Oremus
Collect
Old Testament reading
gradual (or Responsorial Psalm)
Epistle
Alleluia (tract during Lent)
Gospel
Hymn of the day
Homily or Postil (Sermon)
Nicene Creed (Athanasian Creed on Trinity Sunday)
Offertory
Prayers of the Faithful





The Service of the Eucharist



Preface (Sursum corda / Sanctus / Hosanna)
Eucharistic Prayer (Epiclesis / Words of Institution / Memorial Acclamation)
Lord's Prayer
Sign of peace / pax (elevation)
Agnus Dei
Distribution
Nunc dimittis
Postcommunion
Benedicamus Domino
Benediction
Dismissal
Ite, missa est





Participants



Acolyte
bishop
cantor
choir
crucifer
deacon
elder
laity
lector
Pastor (or Priest)
usher





Parts of the Sanctuary



altar
altar bell
altar crucifix
altar rails
kneeler
piscina
processional cross
tabernacle





Candles



altar candle
paschal candle
sanctuary lamp
votive candle





Liturgical vessels



ciborium
chalice
cruet





Liturgical objects



collection basket
holy water
incense (use)
paten
sacramental bread (wafer)
sacramental wine
thurible





Vestments



alb
chasuble
dalmatic
geneva gown
humeral veil
stole
surplice
tunicle





Liturgical books and hymnals



Agenda
Christian Worship (Supplement)
Evangelical Lutheran Hymn-Book
Evangelical Lutheran Hymnary
Evangelical Lutheran Worship
Lutheran Book of Worship
Lutheran Hymnal
Lutheran Hymnal with Supplement
Lutheran Service Book
Lutheran Worship
Service Book and Hymnal








 Lutheranism portal












v
t
e


Glassware



Tumblers



 Collins glass
 Highball glass
 Old Fashioned glass
 Shot glass
 Table-glass





Beer glassware



 Beer stein
 Pilsner glass
 Pint glass
 Pony glass
 Tankard
 Wheat beer glass
 Yard glass





Stemware



 Absinthe glass
 Chalice
 Champagne coupe
 Champagne flute
 Cocktail glass
 Glencairn whisky glass
 Hurricane glass
 Margarita glass
 Sherry glass
Snifter
 Wine glass










