



The Death of Nornagest

Gunnar Vidar Forssell






Die Nornen

Johannes Gehrts (1889)


Nornagests þáttr or the Story of Norna-Gest is a legendary saga about the Norse hero Nornagestr, sometimes called Gestr, and here anglicized as Norna-Gest.



Contents


1 Summary
2 Sources
3 Other references
4 Notes
5 References
6 External links



Summary[edit]
Norna-Gest was the son of a Danish man named Thord of Thinghusbit, who once dwelt on the estate of Grøning in Denmark. When he was born, three Norns arrived and had foretold the child's destiny. Two of them gave him good gifts. However Skuld, the youngest of the Norns, deeming that the two others made rather light of her, determined to render void their promises of good fortune for the child. So she prophesied that his life was to last no longer than that of a candle standing lit beside the cradle. The eldest Norn (Urðr) instantly extinguished the flame and asked his mother to hide it well.
When Norna-Gest had grown up he became the care-taker of the candle and he is said to have lived for 300 years. He took part in the battles of Sigurd the Völsung, spent time with Ragnar Lodbrok's son Björn Ironside and his brothers, with Starkad, with the Swedish king Sigurd Hring, with King Erik at Uppsala1, with King Harald Fairhair and with King Hlodver2 in Germany.
According to legend, when King Olaf Tryggvason tried to convert the Norse to Christianity, he brought Norna-Gest to his court. In the third year of the reign of King Olaf, Norna-Gest came into the presence of the king and asked to be admitted to his bodyguard. He was uncommonly tall and strong and somewhat stricken in years. Norna-Gest afterward permitted himself to be baptized at the king's desire and lit the candle that the norn Skuld had prophesied about. In accordance with the prophecy, when the candle failed, Norna-Gest died.
Sources[edit]
The story of Norna-Gest is narrated in Nornagests þáttr, which was written about the year 1300.[citation needed] The story was later incorporated as an episode of the Saga of Óláfr Tryggvason in the medieval Icelandic manuscript Flateyjarbók which contains several poems from the Poetic Edda. [1]
Other references[edit]
The story of Nornagest and his candle has a counterpart in Greek mythology: the story of Meleager, who was prophesied to live only as long as a certain log was unburnt. The story is included in Ovid's Metamorphoses.
Science fiction writer Poul Anderson incorporated the story of Nornagest in The Boat of a Million Years, a collection of short stories about immortals.
Notes[edit]

^1 Eiríkr at Uppsölum is almost a default name for the Swedish king. It could refer to Erik Refilsson, Erik Björnsson, Erik Anundsson or Eric the Victorious.
^2 Hlodver of Germany probably refers either to Louis the German or Louis II, Holy Roman Emperor.

References[edit]



^ Norse Mythology: Legends of Gods and Heroes (Peter A. Munch. New York: The American-Scandinavian Foundation. 1926) Archived 2011-07-14 at the Wayback Machine.



External links[edit]

Norna-Gests þáttr in Old Norse
Nora Kershaw's 1921 Translation
Norna-Gest's Thattr in English Translation with Facing Old Norse Text
Entry in the Stories for All Time database, with a full list of manuscripts, editions, translations, and secondary literature.







v
t
e


Legendary sagas






Af Upplendinga konungum
Áns saga bogsveigis
Ásmundar saga kappabana
Bósa saga ok Herrauðs
Egils saga einhenda ok Ásmundar berserkjabana
Eiríks saga víðförla
Frá Fornjóti ok hans ættmönnum
Friðþjófs saga frækna
Gautreks saga ok Gjafa-Refs
Gríms saga loðinkinna
Göngu-Hrólfs saga
Hálfdanar saga Brönufóstra
Hálfdanar saga Eysteinssonar
Hálfs saga konungs ok Hálfsrekka
Heiðreks saga konungs ok Hervarar
Helga þáttr Þórissonar
Hjálmþés saga ok Ölvis
Hrólfs saga Gautrekssonar
Hrólfs saga kraka
Hrómundar saga Gripssonar
Högna saga Hálfdanarsonar
Illuga saga Gríðarfóstra
Ingvars saga víðförla
Ketils saga hængs
Norna-Gests þáttr
Ragnars saga loðbrókar
Ragnarssona þáttr
Sturlaugs saga starfsama
Sögubrot af nokkrum fornkonungum í Dana ok Svíaveldi
Sörla saga sterka
Tóka þáttr Tókasonar
Völsunga saga
Þjalar-Jóns saga
Þorsteins saga Víkingssonar
Þorsteins þáttr bæjarmagns
Örvar-Odds saga










